The world’s “Most Instagrammable Hotel” is in the Maldives, according to Luxury Travel Advisor magazine.
Despite recent violence and a state of emergency in the Indian Ocean archipelago, the title went to the Anantara Kihavah Maldives Villas.
It offers 80 private pool villas — some on stilts over the water, others on a “pristine stretch of private beach”.
A post shared by Anantara Kihavah Villas (@anantarakihavah) on Apr 9, 2018 at 5:54am PDT
Guests are invited to “snorkel some of the world’s most treasured reefs within a Unesco World Biosphere Reserve”. They can dine at any of four restaurants, with the possibility of an “underwater dining experience”.
Karl Webster, cluster director of PR and communications for the property, said: “The underwater restaurant, Sea and the recently launched overwater bar, observatory and night sky viewing deck known as Sky, helps position Anantara Kihavah as a breathtaking property to photograph and show off to friends through social channels.
“It really does have that wow factor.”
A double room starts at £1,173 per night, including breakfast but no other meals. In addition, guests are obliged to take the resort’s seaplane transfer from the international airport, costing £802 return when shared, or £11,234 if exclusive.
A post shared by Anantara Kihavah Villas (@anantarakihavah) on Mar 6, 2018 at 3:06am PST
The resort is 30 minutes by air from Malé, the capital. The Foreign Office warns of possible anti-government protests” in the city and elsewhere. A number of opposition politicians have been jailed amid considerable political turmoil. A state of emergency was lifted last month.
“Exercise caution and avoid any protests or rallies,” warns the FCO — adding: “There are no reports that outlying islands, resorts or Malé International Airport have been affected.
The US State Department says: “Exercise increased caution in Maldives due to terrorism and civil unrest.”
Mr Webster said: “There is now and was no impact on domestic or international travel as all developments were confined to an isolated area in Malé.
“The safety of our guests is paramount and as such I would also like to stress that there is no indication whatsoever that there is any impact on guests’ safety.”
In second place in the contest was a property in Ubud, Bali: Mandapa, A Ritz-Carlton Reserve.
Bali high: Mandapa , A Ritz-Carlton Reserve, near Ubud ( Mandapa , A Ritz-Carlton Reserve)
It was just ahead of Viceroy Los Cabos, in San Jose del Cabo, near the tip of the Baja Peninsula in south-west Mexico. Curiously, this resort has yet to open. The Foreign Office says: “There has been a rise in drug-related crime in Baja California Sur, including Los Cabos. You should take extra care when travelling to these areas.”
Last in the top quartet was another Mexican property, the Hotel Matilda in San Miguel de Allende, north-west of Mexico City.