Alex Beckett, best known for playing Barney Lumsden in the BBC satirical comedy W1A, has died aged 35.
Beckett’s agent Gavin Denton-Jones confirmed the news in a statement, calling Lumsden “a wonderful man and a hugely talented actor”.
“Our thoughts are with his family and we kindly ask that their privacy be respected at this difficult time,” the statement reads.
The actor was appearing in the Donmar Warehouse’s current production of The Way of the World, the London theatre cancelling the rest of this week’s performances.
Donmar’s artistic director Josie Rourke and executive producer Kate Pakenham said: “We are deeply shocked by the tragic loss of our dear friend and brilliant actor Alex Beckett, a much loved member of The Way of the World company. We are completely devastated by this terribly sad news.”
Notable deaths in 2018 – in pictures
13 show all Notable deaths in 2018 – in pictures
1/13 Stephen Hawking The theoretical physicist died at the age of 76, on 14 March. The iconic physicist is known as one of the greatest scientific minds in the history of the world, and worked to peer into the most mysterious parts of the universe. Hawking was known also for the accessible way in which he communicated those discoveries, with his work including A Brief History Of Time making its way into pop culture Getty
2/13 Marielle Franco The politician was brutally murdered in downtown Rio de Janeiro on 14 March, in what officials have concluded was a targeted political assassination. A black LGBT+ woman in a country notoriously dominated by racism, sexism and traditional religious dogma, she was raised in one of Rio’s largest, poorest and most violent slums, the Maré complex AP
3/13 Ken Dodd The comedy legend died aged 90, on 11 March. Sir Ken, famous for his epic stand-up shows which could go on for hours at a time, as well as his Diddy Men and tickling stick, died just days after leaving hospital. Getty
4/13 Hubert de Givenchy The founder of the eponymous French fashion house died aged 91, on 10 March. In an impressive career that spanned more than five decades, Givenchy was renowned for dressing the likes of Jackie Kennedy, the Duchess of Windsor and Audrey Hepburn, his long-time muse Rex
5/13 Davide Astori The footballer died after a cardiac arrest aged 31 on 4 March. He was captain of Fiorentina, and an Italian international with 14 appearances for the national side Getty
6/13 Emma Chambers The British actress, best known for her roles in ‘The Vicar of Dibley’ and ‘Notting Hill’, died aged 53, on 21 February. A statement from her agency said: ‘Emma created a wealth of characters and an immense body of work. She brought laughter and joy to many, and will be greatly missed.’ Rex
7/13 John Mahoney The actor, famous for his role in long-running TV show ‘Frasier’, died at the age of 77, on 4 February. The British-born star was on the show for 11 seasons spanning from 1993 through to 2004 and his character, Martin Crane, is a fan favourite Getty
8/13 Mark E Smith The lead singer and the main artist behind The Fall, died aged 60, on 24 January Famous for his acerbic wit, Smith was the ever present member in the band, going through over sixty members in the group's fourty year duration
9/13 Hugh Masekela The legendary South African jazz trumpeter and anti-apartheid activist died on 23 January at the age of 78 after suffering from cancer. Masekela, branded the ‘father of South African jazz’, died in Johannesburg after what his family described as a ‘protracted and courageous battle with prostate cancer’. AFP/Getty
10/13 Jimmy Armfield The Blackpool legend and former England captain passed away, aged 82, on 22 January. The right-back played 627 matches for the Lancashire club between 1954 and 1971, and captained England 15 times in 43 appearances. He would later go on to manage Bolton Wanderers and Leeds United, before working as a pundit for the BBC for thirty years Getty
11/13 Ursula Le Guin The celebrated science fiction and fantasy author died at the age of 88, on 22 January. Among the author’s best-known works are the 1969 science fiction novel ‘Left Hand of Darkness’, which explores themes of gender by featuring characters with no fixed sex, and the 1968 coming-of-age story ‘A Wizard of Earthsea’ Getty
12/13 Dolores O’Riordan The singer died on 15 January, aged 46. Born into a staunchly Catholic family, O’Riordan was 17 when she responded to a press advert for a female vocalist to join The Cranberry Saw Us, comprising brothers Noel and Mike Hogan and Fergal Lawler, in 1989. Soon after she became lead singer, they became The Cranberries and cut a three-track EP on an independent label AFP/Getty
13/13 Cyrille Regus The former England footballer died from a heart attack aged 59, on 14 January. The ex-footballer, who scored 112 goals in 297 appearances for West Bromwich Albion, also turned out for Coventry City and Aston Villa in the top flight, as well as playing for Wolverhampton Wanderers, Wycombe Wanderers and Chester City in the later years of his career before retiring in 1996. Regis was a pioneer for black footballers in Britain Getty
Beckett played Barney Lumsden, who works for the agency Perfect Curve, in the satirical comedy W1A, as well as in Twenty Twelve, alongside co-stars Hugh Bonneville and Jessica Hynes.
Hynes posted a tribute to Twitter, reading: “Alex Beckett was a wonderful, clever, kind, brilliant person – so glad to have known him, so sad he is gone.”
Shane Allen, comedy commissioner at the BBC, said: “We’re all incredibly crushed to hear of Alex’s untimely death. “He was a very prolific, versatile and much admired comedy star whose role as Barney Lumsden in both Twenty Twelve and W1A was a key ingredient of their success.
“We think of him fondly and our hearts go out to his family and friends at this painfully sad time.”
Born in Carmarthenshire, South Wales, in 1982, Beckett trained as an actor at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts in London, graduating in 2003.