Owen Farrell faces a race against time to be fit for Saracens season-defining clash with European Champions Cup favourites Leinster next Sunday after Billy Vunipola appeared to lose his fight to play.
The England three-quarter, nursing a quad injury, watched from the side-lines at the London Stadium on Saturday as Mark McCall’s team secured a tortuous 24-11 win over Aviva Premiership rivals Harlequins in a desperately stop-start affair which saw Maro Itoje return to form after a difficult Six Nations campaign.
Farrell missed the match along with England lock George Kruis (back) and No8 Vunipola - who has been out of action since breaking his arm in January - and the Saracens fly half remains a doubt for Sunday’s hugely-anticipated encounter in Dublin.
Six Nations Team of the Tournament
15 show all Six Nations Team of the Tournament
1/15 1. Cian Healy (Ireland) At one stage it looked as if the loosehead prop had lost his place in the Irish side due to a combination of repeated injuries and the emergence of Jack McGrath, but the 30-year-old enjoyed a resurgent tournament in which he won back the No 1 jersey and enjoyed emphatic performances against Scotland and England. Getty
2/15 2. Guilhem Guirado (France) It’s harsh to leave out the Grand Slam-winning captain Rory Best but Guilhem Guirado simply cannot be left out of the side. His performances throughout the campaign were of the highest degree, and even when he struggled in one area – such as the lineout against England – he enjoyed a destructive display in the loose. Had he been available for the final match in Wales, the French could easily have won it. Getty
3/15 3. Tadhg Furlong (Ireland) Proved why he is so revered around the world with a string of match-defining performances, not least his man-of-the-match display against England to help secure the Grand Slam triumph. His scrummaging is as strong, but it’s his work in the loose that really stood out this year as he showed a talent to not only carry powerfully but also pass with the ability of an inside back. Getty
4/15 4. Alun Wyn Jones (Wales) Another year, another storming display from the Wales lock, whose captaincy this year was very reliable and performances even better. At 32 years old, the lock would not have been blamed for starting to tail off, but Father Time has not caught up with him just yet and Jones even celebrated a new contract during the tournament to prove he’s got no plans to let off just yet. Jones was excellent in the opening victory over Scotland and was unlucky to be on the losing side against the English. Getty
5/15 5. James Ryan (Ireland) One of the finds of the tournament and a man who looks to have a bright future in the Irish second-row. Ryan more often than not made The Independent’s team of the weekend – which is some doing given he missed a week through injury – and at just 21 years old he is growing in both talent and the impression that he is making on matches. Getty
6/15 6. Peter O’Mahony (Ireland) The Munster flanker picked up where he left off in the Six Nations following his star cameo last year, and with his fitness concerns well behind him, O’Mahony was excellent in disrupting opposition lineout and also proved a massive thorn in the side of rival teams in the breakdown. The 28-year-old has a level that he rarely dips below, and he’s emerged as one of the most consistent performers not just in the Ireland squad, but in the entire championship. Getty
7/15 7. Josh Navidi (Wales) In the absence of Sam Warburton, Navidi seized his chance with both hands as the Cardiff Blues flanker enjoyed a wonderful opening performance against Scotland as wreaked havoc on their possession, and he also impressed in defeat by Ireland. Getty
8/15 8. CJ Stander (Ireland) A marauding performance against England is a good way to sum up his tournament, which saw him flourish in the injury-enforced absences of Billy Vunipola and Taulupe Faletau. Stander was the standout No 8 by some way, and while Scotland’s Ryan Wilson had a few moments to remember, the Irishman was simply on another level throughout the competition. Getty
9/15 9. Gareth Davies (Wales) A controversial choice given what Conor Murray contributed to Ireland’s Grand Slam success, but Murray is widely regarded as the best scrum-half in the world and that is almost granted now. In Davies, Wales turned to their back-up scrum-half in the absence of Rhys Webb and they found a more than able replacement who will hold them in good stead moving forwards. Davies scored a sneaky interception try against Scotland and bagged another against Ireland, and he takes the shirt for stepping up to international level and taking it all in his stride. Getty
10/15 10. Johnny Sexton (Ireland) The man was nothing short of brilliant throughout the tournament and kicked one of the most memorable drop-goals in history to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat against France. He masterminded Ireland’s rampant back line and found ways to bring the best out of the three outside centres that he played with as well as both wings, and his tactical kicking from hand was as good as it’s ever been. Getty
11/15 11. Jacob Stockdale (Ireland) His international record of 11 tries in just nine matches is nothing short of phenomenal and he appears to have all of the traits of a world class wing, having demonstrated pace, a strong reading of the game with two interception tries and a clinical finish against England to touch down his own chip and chase. At just 21 years old, he could turn out to be one of the greats. Getty
12/15 12. Hadleigh Parkes (Wales) His selection for Wales was certainly a controversial one but his Test level calibre is no longer in question after a number of strong performances for Wales. The New Zealand-born centre hit the ground running in week one and formed a strong partnership with his Scarlets colleague Scott Williams, and also linked up well with Owen Watkin when the Ospreys star was brought into the side. Getty
13/15 13. Huw Jones (Scotland) Jones certainly had a flying start to the tournament, but this was perhaps the most competitive spot in the team that could have gone just about anywhere – except England. Ireland’s 13s were all performed well but, with Robbie Henshaw, Chris Farrell and Garry Ringrose all taking turns in the shirt due to injury, there was no consistency. Mathieu Bastareaud’s return to the France side showed how far he has developed, while Italy’s Tommaso Boni was a real find for Italy until he suffered a championship-ending injury against France. Even though he tailed off, Jones was excellent against England and also impressed with an excellent try against France. Getty
14/15 14. Keith Earls (Ireland) This was the tournament that Earls proved why he has been around the international stage for so long, and having missed out on the 2009 Grand Slam success as well as the 2014 and 2015 championship wins, it felt like just desserts for the Munster wing. Earls may have only scored one try all tournament, but his work rate was a key reason why Ireland scored more tries than ever before. Getty
15/15 15. Matteo Minozzi (Italy) For so long Sergio Parisse has been the lone Italian in the Six Nations Team of the Tournament, but it’s time for the talismanic No 8 to step aside after the arrival of full-back Minozzi. Not only did he make his first start for his country against England, he became the first Italian to score in four straight Six Nations matches and displayed an attacking threat that few Azzurri players have possessed. His speed combined with footwork that Jason Robinson would be proud of should see the 21-year-old become a player to watch for the foreseeable future. Getty
With captain and inside centre Brad Barritt also struggling after appearing to leave the field with concussion late in the second half against Quins, 24-year-old Alex Lozowski could be a pivotal play-maker at the Aviva Stadium.
Lozowski, capped four times by England, produced an excellent all-round performance in a largely disjointed win over hapless Quins in front of more than 55,000 fans on Saturday and insists he is ready to run the quarter-final show if called upon.
“I will do whatever the team needs, whether that is starting or coming off the bench,” Losowski said. “I am looking forward to making a difference.
“Everyone wants to play in these big games. That’s why I signed for Saracens and why I play here because we hope to be competing at the top end of these competitions. Everyone is massively excited by next week. We will have a couple of days off to get energised and come in firing on Tuesday.”
Saracens scraped into the last eight with a bonus-point win over Northampton in January after recording back-to-back losses to Clermont and drawing away to Ospreys in their pool.
Billy Vunipola is running out of time (Getty)
Leinster powered through their pool as first seeds and, with a host of Ireland internationals buoyed by their recent Grand Slam triumph, are many peoples pick to claim their fourth European Cup title in the last decade.
“I am not sure who is the underdog and who is not,” Lozowski added. “It is not something I take much notice of. It is going to be a belter, two teams desperate to win and desperate for success. It’s going to be class.”
With Vunipola apparently certain not to play, while Farrell, Kruis and Barritt are all doubts, Saracens will need their remaining fit internationals to stand up and be counted in Dublin.
Owen Farrell has been struggling with fitness (Getty)
McCall said: “Owen has got a quad injury. George Kruis has a back injury. Both are touch and go for next week. I don’t think Billy will make it.”
Itoje, stung by criticism of his performances for England during a hugely disappointing Six Nations campaign, was outstanding on Saturday as McCall’s men easily overcame a demoralised Harlequins outfit showing no sign of getting back to winning ways.
Itoje scored a superb individual try and made a telling all-round contribution in an infuriatingly stop-start game marred by continual stoppages in play and persistent back chat from players directed at referee Tom Foley.
The second row celebrated his first-half score by pretending to fall asleep, mocking his detractors to the amusement of his team-mates, but looked fit, fresh and energised in a display which made his laboured showings for England even more bemusing.
Maro Itoje had a superb game (Getty)
“Maro has been full of energy,” Lozowski said. “He has always. He is a phenomenal player and also a big voice in the team. We rely on him a lot and he is happy to shoulder that responsibility. He speaks well in the group and leads by example in his actions. It is great to have him back.”
With several of Saracens leading figures struggling to be fit, Itoje will be a central figure as McCall’s men look to progress to the last four of a tournament they have won twice and been runners up in the last three years.
“I am just happy to be back at the club,” Itoje said. “I have had a tough couple of weeks and have come back into a loving environment. I am alright, I have got youth on my side, I am only 23 years old.”
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.