Amal Clooney has landed her first cover for Vogue, fronting the magazine’s May issue.
Photographed by Annie Leibovitz for the US fashion bible in an eight-page-spread, the leading human rights lawyer radiated in a fuchsia Alexander McQueen top and a pair of decadent Cartier drop-earrings.
In the candid interview, the mother-of-twins opened up about falling in love with George Clooney, gun control and the rise of the #MeToo movement.
Clooney wears a Johanna Ortiz dress with Van Cleef and Arpels earrings and Christian Louboutin shoes (Annie Leibovitz /American Vogue)
The genetically-blessed duo gave birth to twins in June last year after a star-studded wedding in Venice, Italy in 2016.
The celebrated humanitarian praises her Hollywood husband throughout the interview and describes falling in love with him as “the most natural thing in the world”.
She added that the couple spend a lot of time at home together (they live together in Sonning-on-Thames, a village in Berkshire) to ensure their relationship is kept as private as possible.
Before meeting George at the age of 35, Amal explained she hadn’t been excited by the thought of getting married and having a family.
She also revealed how beneficial she thinks the #MeToo movement has been in giving women a platform to share their stories of harassment, which she hopes will benefit her daughter, Ella, in the future.
“I think because of the brave women who have come forward to tell their stories, the future workplace will be safer for my daughter than it was for people of my generation,” she said.
“We’re in a situation where a predator feels less safe and a professional woman feels more safe, and that’s where we need to be.”
(American Vogue)
Just two weeks after the couple marched alongside demonstrators at the March for Our Lives protest in Washington calling for stricter gun laws following the Parkland shooting - they also donated $500,000 (£352,150) to the cause - Amal also took the opportunity to weigh in on gun control in the interview:
“I’ve seen lots of commentary where people have tried to say, ‘This isn’t about having too many guns or allowing semiautomatic and automatic weapons to be purchased too easily — surely this is about mental health, or about violence and movies,'” she said.
“The fact is, there are violent movies all over the world, and there are mental health issues in other countries. But this doesn’t happen in other developed countries. The difference is guns, and how widely and easily available they are."
CAN WE JUST commend Vogue for highlighting the fact that she is a lawyer and activist and didn't say something stupid like she was JUST George's wife or JUST a fashion icon. She's a BOSS ASS WOMAN. https://t.co/6ASd2hqesw — Love, Brett (@BrettDBurger) April 10, 2018
The cover has proved popular online, with fans admiring Clooney's beauty and praising Vogue for its thoughtful profile.
"Is this the most intellectually accomplished woman ever to make the cover of Vogue?" one person wrote on Twitter.
"What started out looking and sounding like a classic puff piece actually turned into a really interesting read," added another.
"Vogue probably thought they’d gotten the celeb scoop of the year, but instead, Amal got a loudspeaker for her work. Clever cookie."