The TV presenter Ant McPartlin has been fined £86,000 and disqualified from driving for 20 months after admitting drink-driving.
The 42-year-old entertainer crashed into two vehicles after taking a corner at speed while under the influence in Richmond, south-west London, last month. He was more than twice the legal limit.
On Monday, at Wimbledon magistrates court in south-west London, district judge Barbara Barnes told the the Saturday Night Takeaway host he had let down many people including his fans. “I think it will have quite an impact on you to know that you are no longer a man of good character but you carry a [criminal] record,” she said.
McPartlin spoke in court only to confirm his personal details and enter his guilty plea. But, through his lawyer, he expressed his remorse for what had happened.
While driving his car under the influence of alcohol, he hit a green Mini and then a red BMW as he lost control after the initial collision. In impact statements read in court, the respective drivers of the cars he crashed into said they were left heavily shaken.
Ant McPartlin speaks out about depression and addiction Read more
Faheem Vanoo, the driver of the green Mini, said his vehicle could have been hit front-on if he had not taken evasive action. “We believe we could have died as a result of Mr McPartlin’s reckless driving,” he said.
The driver of the BMW, named only as Dr Ng, said immediately after the collision her nine-year-old son, who was uninjured but in shock, told her: “I am dying, Mummy, I am dying.” She said she was suffering from neck pain and her right knee was too painful to walk on.
The court heard that in a statement submitted last month, McPartlin said: “I am ashamed and mortified that this happened. I accept full culpability for this and wish to apologise to all concerned … I am incredibly disappointed that have let myself and so many others down on this occasion.”
His lawyer, Liam Walker, told the court his client hoped the case would be a turning point for him. Referring to reports that McPartlin entered rehab after being charged, Walker said the Bafta-winning entertainer had been seeking treatment for alcohol- and emotional-related issues at the time of the incident. Walker said McPartlin had a brief relapse on the day of the incident.
Barnes said McPartlin’s culpability was high but he had shown genuine remorse.
Speaking outside, after the hearing, the I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! host said he was truly sorry and expressed relief that no one was injured more seriously.