It's March, when you're not quite over the Christmas spending pit and the bills for Easter splurges, summer getaways, extra thermals to cope with the beast from the east, and the rest are starting to creep back up.
Few would naturally reach for the credit card application form as a solution to existing credit card debt. But they may be missing a trick.
While many debt-free die-hards consider them the devil’s best weapon in driving you into insurmountable debt (indeed around 18m people receive a default notice on their credit card bill each year), used properly, they could help manage your finances better thanks to interest free periods and balance transfer offers that operate like an interest free loan as long as you play by the rules.
Meanwhile, buying something with a credit card can afford you more protection than buying using a debit card or cash. Some credit cards are even designed to help those with bad credit to improve their credit rating, helping open the door to a whole range of other financial products they may not have otherwise been eligible for.
But this jargon-heavy market is swamped with a dizzying array of credit card deals. The good news is that those deals have never been so generous. So where on earth do you start?
Credit cards explained
Long gone are the days of simply using a credit card to buy goods and services. Now, it’s all about working out the best credit card deals for your personal circumstances and needs. The best way to do a credit card comparison is to decide what you want from the offer and work backwards.
New purchases
If dipping your toe into the credit card pool is about funding a specific purchase, you need a card offering the longest 0% interest period on new purchases, giving you the longest time to pay off those expensive one-offs.
And that period can be two years or more. Sainsbury's Bank offers 0% interest on purchases for 31 months, though the rate then reverts to 18.95%, with extra nectar points on Sainbury's and fuel spends.
Indeed, as long as the balance is paid off by the end of the period, those who can't quite put a full stop on the spending this month might also want to consider the latest M&S Shopping Plus Offer Credit Card , with rewards points, cashback and balance transfer deals is probably your best bet if you're a regular shopper, alongside its 25 month interest free balance transfer window with a 2.9% fee and 0% on purchases, also for 25 months, followed by 18.9%.
Or there's TSB's Platinum Purchase card, offering a 20 month interest free deal on new purchases and 1% cashback - as long as you jump through a few hoops.
The watchwords here are ‘paid off’ though, and if you think it’s unlikely that you’d clear the debts even over two and a half years, you are probably better off seeking out the best long term low rate deal, currently MBNA’s 60 month offer at 4.9% interest with a low fee of 0.5% before rising to 8.9%.
Best credit card rewards and cashback cards
And that’s not all. Big spenders who religiously pay off their balance either every month or at least by the end of the interest free period could be quids in by opting for a credit card that offers the best cashback deal or the best credit card rewards.
If it’s cash you’re looking for, the Platinum Cashback Everyday Credit Card from American Express tops the offers with 5% cashback for purchases in the first three months up to £100, up to 1% after that. Which sounds generous until you get hit by the 22.9% variable interest rate on anything you do buy. Pay it off regularly and fully to ensure the cashback you receive isn't eclipsed by the charges.
But if your rewards of choice don’t need to be all about the money in your pocket and can be more specific, such as Nectar points or M&S vouchers, they can be worth more than the cash return on your credit card spending.
For the best credit card rewards, it's all about the supermarkets, with M&S, Sainsbury's, John Lewis/Waitrose, Asda and Tesco Bank credit cards offering rewards points when you shop with them, so your weekly shop could start giving you something back if you select wisely.
The John Lewis and Waitrose partnership card gives new customers 1000 points when they transfer a balance of £500 or spend £500 within 90 days. Crucially though, it offers an ongoing 1 point per £1 spent at John Lewis or Waitrose.
And the Sainsbury's Nectar credit card not only gives spenders in its stores and online an ongoing trickle of nectar points but also a 20,000 point boost if you spend more than £2000 in the first three months. While that might look like one hell of a food shop, but with the average grocery bill alone coming in at more than £53.00 per person per week according to the Office for National Statistics, a family of four is probably shelling out £2500 over that period anyway.
With all these reward or cashback cards, maximising your rewards is all about spending big but paying the balance back in full. If not, the interest and fees very quickly outweigh the benefits.
Best balance transfer cards
But what if you’ve already run up the debts and despite your best efforts to drive down your borrowing, have come to the end of your 0% interest deal before you've paid it off? Then it’s all about transferring the balance for as low a fee as possible, usually with the longest window of opportunity to pay it off.
The truth is that you could have secured longer deals until recently, but with the powers that be scrutinising the way credit card providers target and deal with their customers, those days are probably over.
Still, there are some excellent offers out there, offering plenty of time to get those debts paid off if you can keep on top of your spending. Right now, the best balance transfer deal for those who need as much time as they can get their hands on to repay is currently from Nuba, whose 37 month 0% deal comes with a 1.98% balance transfer fee.
Meanwhile, Sainsbury's Bank comes back to the fore with a 33 month 0% balance transfer offer with a low 0.59% balance transfer fee and nectar points.
Increasingly though, providers are offering dual deals on both balance transfers and new purchases. If you need a really large window of opportunity and don't mind paying something in interest for the privilege, you'd do well to beat that MBNA 5 Credit Card, offering a 5 year balance transfer and new purchases at 4.9% interest for transactions made within the first 60 days after taking out the card.
Best credit cards for bad credit
Credit card eligibility can keep you awake at night, but there are cards out there serving the same balance and money transfer, new purchase, rewards and cashback needs for those with bad credit.
For new purchases, you could opt for Barclaycard Initial's 3 month 0% offer, though the rate soars to 34.9% once the deal ends.
Nor do previous difficulties necessarily rule you out of the rewards side of the credit card market, though the cashback deals aren't quite as generous as they are for those with a squeaky clean credit score. Here, Aqua’s 0.5% cashback offer is likely to be your best bet despite the fact that it comes with a 34.9% interest rate on purchases that blows that benefit away if you don't pay it off in full every month.
No matter what your circumstances, credit card preferences or spending plans, the golden rules are to be realistic about what you can afford to spend and ultimately repay, be disciplined about repayments by setting up a direct debit every month, and remember that credit card providers are out to make money, not solve your financial problems for you.
Always check the small print, especially annual charges, fees, and their rules on the order of repayments. Failing to do so could make the best credit card deal a very expensive affair indeed.
Figures correct on 08/03/2018.