Six months later, Sands followed his wife onto the operating table for the couple’s second right knee operation in less than a year. And for the past few weeks, they have been doing their recovery work in tandem. They hook up to the same electric wave-therapy machine, they warm up and stretch together, and they do some of the same exercises, like the agonizing wall-sits to build strength in their quad muscles. And, of course, they have matching scars.
The family that rehabilitates together stays together.
“It’s pretty similar how you rehab for the two injuries,” Sands said.
Sands, who runs his own insurance business, was a defensive lineman at the University of Albany and later tried out for the Arena Football League and N.F.L. teams as a long snapper. He never made it, but he knows about training and recovery — he had previous knee injuries as a player.
Photo
It was while working out at a gym in Arizona that he met Bethanie Mattek. They had three dates, became engaged, and were married shortly after, in November 2008. Since then they have been almost inseparable, even in rehab.
Mattek-Sands is ahead of her husband’s recovery, although Sands can now walk without a limp. But the scars remain, including the mental one. When Sands recently described his injury and pointed to his knee, his wife recoiled and looked away. “It’s too soon for me to look at other knee injuries,” she said.
Squeamish as she may be, Mattek-Sands was strong enough to return to tournament play last month. She played singles and doubles at the recent Miami Open, where she lost in the opening rounds of both draws. She was also given a wild card to play in last week’s WTA tournament in Charleston, S.C. She lost in the first round of the singles to Aleksandra Krunic, 6-2, 6-2, on Monday, illustrating the challenge she still faces in her return from such a painful injury.
“My knee felt good, and that was the most important thing,” she said in Key Biscayne. “It felt solid whether I was up at net or running side to side.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
She partnered with Andrea Sestini Hlavackova in doubles at Charleston. But Mattek-Sands said she still intended to “get the band back together,” and that means renewing her successful partnership with Lucie Safarova of the Czech Republic. Together, they won five Grand Slam doubles titles, including three in a row from the 2016 United States Open through the 2017 French Open, a month before Mattek-Sands’s injury.
Photo
It happened on July 6 at Wimbledon and was far more public than her husband’s injury. As Mattek-Sands approached the net following a backhand service return, her right knee buckled, rupturing her patellar tendon. The kneecap shot up into her upper leg, and as she lay on the grass, she grasped her knee with both hands and screamed out, repeatedly pleading for help.
Dr. David Altchek later performed the operation to repair the tendon and reattach it to the kneecap. Because the procedure involved the bone, Mattek-Sands said, the pain recalled the agony of the original injury, tears and all.
“I was bawling,” she said of the days post-surgery. “I was in an excruciating amount of pain.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
It eventually subsided, but for six weeks she had to keep her leg straight and she needed help to get out of bed, to sit in a chair and just to get around. Once she began rehabbing in earnest last year, Sands was by her side, working out for much of the process.
It was during that period that he developed the concept of the scar tattoo, imagining how cool it would look on his knee. But between taking care of his wife, working his own business and hunting, he never found the time.
“Now I don’t need it,” Sands said. “I have my own scar.”