The benchmark created by the sale of the Panthers, a team that plays in a midsize market with strong growth potential, could come into play in the near future when other N.F.L. teams go up for sale. Sports bankers said the Denver Broncos, New Orleans Saints and Tennessee Titans could change hands in the next few years.
While bidders have emerged for the Panthers, several of them appear unwilling to pay far more than what they believe to be the fair price — around $2.3 billion, according to people with knowledge of the process.
So far, there are six bidders, according to a person with knowledge of the process, though only four are publicly known. David Tepper, the founder of the hedge fund Appaloosa Management and a minority owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers; Michael Rubin, the chairman of Fanatics, the sports merchandise company; and Ben Navarro, who owns Sherman Financial Group, an investment firm, have each made bids to buy the team. The three offers were between $2 billion and $2.2 billion, according to several people with knowledge of the bids who could not publicly discuss the auction.
Alan Kestenbaum, the chief executive of Bedrock Industries, which owns and operates metal and mining companies, has also bid, though it’s unclear at what price.
The sale of the team has been a point of focus at the N.F.L. owners meeting here. Representatives from the 32 teams were briefed on the auction on Monday. They were told that a winning bid could be selected by the end of April. Assuming the prospective owner survives due diligence, the owners could vote on that bid at their next meeting in Atlanta in late May. At least 24 owners have to approve a buyer before the transaction can be completed.
Richardson, who has taken a less active role in league proceedings in recent years, has not attended the meetings here. A team spokesman, Steven Drummond, declined to comment on the potential sale of the Panthers.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
In December, the league said it would investigate allegations that Richardson sexually harassed female employees of the team over a period of many years. Soon after Sports Illustrated published a report detailing those allegations, Richardson, 82, said he would sell the team.
Certain N.F.L. owners have already started to make their preferences known. Many owners have said that, all bids being equal, they prefer Tepper because he already owns a stake in the Steelers, which he would have to sell if he bought the Panthers, and because he has the financial wherewithal, with a net worth of roughly $11 billion.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Rubin, who teamed up on his bid with Joe Tsai, the co-founder of the Alibaba Group, is also known to N.F.L. owners because Fanatics is the official retail partner of team merchandise.
While both Tepper and Rubin appear willing to continue bidding for the team, neither are prepared to pay $2.5 billion, according to several people with knowledge of the auction, though they could be posturing.
Representatives for Tepper, Rubin, Kestenbaum and Navarro all declined to comment.
At the meetings here, three owners who declined to be identified because they did not want to be seen injecting themselves into the process, said that Navarro’s holdings in companies that lend to subprime borrowers might be a stumbling block for them.
Navarro’s company, Sherman Financial Group, has stakes in financial services companies around the world, but 90 percent of the revenue and income comes from Credit One Bank, which issues credit cards to credit-challenged customers. Credit One has been sued for using aggressive collection techniques.
Among other things, Sherman Financial also buys and manages consumer debt. Sherman Financial also paid a $175,000 penalty to settle a case brought by New York attorney general Eric Scheiderman for unlawful debt collection.
Additionally, Sherman Financial also owns about half of a joint venture with the Chedraui family in Mexico that provides similar lending services. The company, Consupago, offers loans that are among the most expensive in Mexico to a captive market of government employees.
On Sunday, Bob McNair, the owner of the Houston Texans, voiced support for Navarro. He cited his philanthropic giving and said he had no issue with his line of work. “His business is a legitimate business,” McNair told reporters. “For me, that wouldn’t be a problem.”