“It’s mad,” says Josie Long, “but it feels like the right thing to do.” Braving the blustery weather at a pavement cafe near their east London home, Long and fellow comedian Jonny Donahoe are discussing their unlikely new project, which enjoys its first and only UK performance next week. For Josie Long and Jonny Donahoe Are Having a Baby (With You), the couple take to the stage to chat, joke and desperately seek advice on the imminent arrival of their first child. They’re taking one of the most intimate experiences a couple can have, and making it public when Long is eight months pregnant – heavy, exhausted and, she says, “physically vulnerable”. What are they thinking?
This isn’t the first time the couple have smudged the line between art and life. Long is a revered art-comic, activist and queen of indie standup; Donahoe is one half of bluesy lefty musical act Jonny and the Baptists. They met when she saw him perform the acclaimed solo theatre show Every Brilliant Thing. Impressed, she invited him to co-author a new project together – about a couple falling in love. “The plan was to have intimate conversations with each other,” says Long, “a very vulnerable writing process, and what came out of it would be very unusual.” But a few months in, both parties were deeply confused. “I remember saying to [the comic] Bridget Christie, ‘I think we might be in love with each other. But it might not be real, it might just be for the show’,” Long remembers. “And she was like: ‘Fuck the show! What do you want, a show or a baby?’ And I was like: I want a baby!”
And so it came to pass – albeit earlier than intended when accidental pregnancy interrupted their meticulous schedule. The couple were touring together in the political cabaret Lefty Scum. Then Long had planned to write a new standup set “about welcoming someone to the whole world. I thought it’d be such a beautiful thing, and I’d tour it loads, then we’d start trying for a baby, and I’d feel in a really good place.” Instead, the couple found themselves unexpectedly expecting on the back of few “tricky” years, as Long describes them, when she’d been ill and “not writing as much as I’d like”.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Lefty Scum … Donahoe and Long on tour with, left, Grace Petrie and, right, Paddy Gervers of Jonny and the Baptists. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian
“So we’re in a position of uncertainty and unpreparedness,” she says. “We’re excited and happy, but it’s frightening and unusual too. That’s where the show comes from. We wanted to have fun with that – and to ask advice from people who are parents too.” They staged an early version in Brooklyn in March, with Daily Show contributor – and parent – John Hodgman as special guest. (In London, it’s Christie.) They posed fretful questions like: “What happens if you lose the kid?” Hodgman and the audience supplied soothing counsel in response.
And in return for the advice, what will their show (and the podcast that may follow) offer audiences? Having read “lots of bad books on the subject”, in Donahoe’s words, the pair aim to puncture some of what Long calls the “unhelpful, unscientific or deep-rooted in sexist bullshit” myths surrounding pregnancy. “To do a show,” she continues, “about becoming parents from – what I now realise is – our unconventional perspective. We want to coparent and we’re aware of how unusual that is.” Their job helps with this aspiration. “As comedians, we’re quite time-rich,” Donahoe says. “We can both take time off. Standup is a very flexible job.”
“And also,” Long adds, “we’re both very open in our work and like to talk about what’s happening in our lives.” On the ethics of making their pregnancy public property, she admits “it’s really tricky. As comedians you want to share – but you want to share what you want to share. And there will always be people who cross the boundary in the wrong way.” Last month, in what became a comedy cause celebre, standup Louise Reay was sued by her ex-husband for breach of privacy. But “I’m not going to sue you,” Jonny promises Josie. “What would I get if I sued you? I haven’t even paid you back for half the sofa.”
Long admits to anxieties, too, about how parenthood may affect her career in a still-sexist industry. “I miss having my brain being my own,” she confesses. “And I hope that once we’ve had our little maternity period I can write another show, tour it, and we can travel as a family.” Finally, that prospect – of new adventures, new horizons – eclipses any anxiety. “I’ve been writing shows that say, ‘I feel like I’m not growing up enough’ – and I don’t want to do that for ever. I want to write shows that say, ‘This is what life is like for me now,’ that tackle the world in a new way. So I’m really up for it. I think having a baby will change our perspective and be difficult and new and unusual. And I embrace all of that.”