Labour leader says decision to join attack against regime should not be made by cabinet alone
Jeremy Corbyn has demanded a private briefing on the government’s intelligence about the Douma chemical weapons attack, saying “more bombing, more killing, more war will not save life” in Syria.
Repeating his declaration that parliament must be consulted before military action is taken, the Labour leader urged Theresa May to learn lessons from the Chilcot report showing failures in the lead-up to the Iraq war.
As cabinet ministers gathered for an emergency meeting in Downing Street on Thursday, he said: “Surely the lessons of Iraq, the lessons that came from the Chilcot report, are that there has to be a proper process of consultation. Cabinet on its own should not be making this decision.”
Trump dials back rhetoric as he says Syria attack may not happen soon – live updates Read more
The Guardian understands that Corbyn has requested a privy council briefing from the government. In 2013, the then Labour leader, Ed Miliband, was given sight of intelligence before a Commons vote on action in Syria, which the then prime minister, David Cameron, lost.
Corbyn said he wanted to see the whole picture, but also wished to see peace in the region, which he said would require restraint by western countries and Russia.
“I want to see an end to the war in Syria. That does mean America and Russia holding back, pulling back and talking to each other,” Corbyn said. “The dangers of bombing now, which could escalate the conflict beyond belief … Just imagine the scenario if an American missile shoots down a Russian plane or vice versa. Where do we go from there?”
Asked whether he opposed military action in Syria under any circumstances, Corbyn said he was “not in favour of increasing military action in Syria; what I’m in favour of is a political process to bring about peace”.
Timeline The Syrian war Show Hide Unprecedented protests demand civil liberties and the release of political prisoners after four decades of repressive rule by the Assad family. The regime represses demonstrations in Damascus and the southern city of Deraa but protests continue. Defecting army colonel Riad al-Asaad sets up the Turkey-based rebel Free Syrian Army. Islamist groups join the revolt. Regime forces take control of the rebel stronghold in Homs after a month of bombardment. Other bloody operations are carried out, notably in the central city of Hama, after massive anti-regime protests. FSA fighters launch a battle for Damascus but the government holds firm. More than 1,400 people die in a chemical weapon attack on rebel-held districts near Damascus. The US and Assad ally Russia agree a plan to eliminate Syria's chemical weapons, averting punitive US strikes against the regime. Hostilities between jihadists and rebel groups turn into an open war in the north. The group that will become known as Islamic State takes Raqqa – the first provincial capital to fall out of regime control – from rebel forces. A US-led coalition launches airstrikes against Isis in Syria. The strikes benefit Kurdish groups, which since 2013 have run autonomous administrations in Kurdish-majority areas. Russia launches airstrikes in support of Assad's troops, who are on the back foot. Russian firepower helps turn the tables for the regime, which begins to retake rebel-held territory. The regime retakes Syria's second city, Aleppo. Russia and Iran, as backers of the Syrian regime, and Turkey, a supporter of the rebels, organise talks in Kazakhstan, between representatives of both sides. The process leads to the creation of four "de-escalation zones". A sarin gas attack on the rebel-held town of Khan Sheikhun kills more than 80 people, prompting Washington to attack a regime airbase. Further complicating an already drawn-out conflict, Turkey launches an operation against the Kurdish People's Protection Units which, with US support, played a key role in beating back Isis. Regime launches a ferocious assault on the remaining rebel-held enclave near Damascus, eastern Ghouta. In under four weeks, the Russian-backed onslaught kills more than 1,200 civilians.
His shadow development secretary, Kate Osamor, struck a different tone, however, telling the House magazine that Bashar al-Assad should be “removed” if he is found to have used chemical weapons on civilians.
“That person needs to be removed. I mean, intervention must take place if evidence comes back that the PM or the president, or whoever the leader is, is gassing his own people. Get them out,” she said. “But I suppose what we’ve seen is it’s not as easy as that. And I think that’s where Jeremy’s position comes from.
“They always seem to abscond, end up in another country. This world is messed up. It’s not easy. But if a leader is killing their own, they need to be removed. We don’t keep them there. They need to go. He needs to be removed.”
Any parliamentary vote on military action would probably cause a significant split in the Labour party, with some MPs likely to listen more sympathetically to the case for intervention.
More than 60 Labour MPs voted with the government to support extending attacks on Islamic State to Syria in 2015, when the shadow cabinet was split on the issue and the then shadow foreign secretary, Hilary Benn, spoke strongly in favour of intervention.
The Rhondda MP Chris Bryant, an expert on the history of parliament, said that without a vote, any military action risked being unlawful. “The whole issue of how we deal with Syria has been contentious for several years and the process of making the argument to parliament is an important part of making the argument to the country.”
He said the government would have to make the case that it had evidence of Syrian involvement in the attack and show that military action would degrade the Assad regime’s ability to use chemical weapons in future.
The Guardian understands that if a motion were brought to parliament for approval, the Labour leadership could whip its MPs to vote against. But Bryant said: “In the end, any vote for war is one of conscience; it always was for Jeremy. It’s almost irrelevant how it’s whipped.”
Alison McGovern, the Wirral South MP who co-chairs the all-party parliamentary group on Syria, said it was important not to reduce the issue to military options alone. “We need to focus on Syrian civilians and find partners in the world who want to cooperate on a comprehensive strategy to protect civilian lives. You’ve got to look right across diplomatic, economic and military issues,” she said.
Some MPs who have backed military intervention in the past said they would wait and see what argument the government makes. The Ilford North MP Wes Streeting said: “We haven’t heard what the government is proposing. There is no sign of any meaningful strategy to address either the clear use of chemical weapons by Assad or the humanitarian catastrophe. In this context, I’m instinctively sceptical.”
Even if the government opts to launch military action without consulting parliament in advance, the prime minister would be expected to report to parliament when MPs return to Westminster from their constituencies on Monday.