Why should beauty have an age limit?
That’s the question former Playboy bunny Dorrie Jacobson asked when she decided to become what she describes as the “world’s oldest lingerie model”.
At the age of 83, Ms Jacobson felt that it was important to imbue older women with a sense of self-confidence and inspire them to challenge the beauty standards set by society.
“Why am I suddenly prancing around in lingerie in my 80s? Because I want to encourage women to embrace their bodies at every age,” Ms Jacobson wrote in an Instagram post.
“Society is obsessed with youth… and I want to broaden that definition of beauty to include women of all ages.
“Why do we have to be young and flawless to be considered beautiful?”
Ms Jacobson runs an Instagram account called Senior Style Bible, on which she regularly discusses breaking down the taboos surrounding ageism and learning to love yourself at any age.
A post shared by Senior Style Bible (@seniorstylebible) on Apr 11, 2018 at 4:25pm PDT
The great grandmother has amassed an impressive following, with 26,600 people following her every fashionable move on Instagram and nearly 25,000 showing their admiration for the style icon on Facebook.
Ms Jacobson was a Playmate for Hugh Hefner in Chicago and New York in the 1960s and plans to continue modelling for as long as she possibly can.
“Age is not a number. It’s an attitude,” Ms Jacobson said in an interview with the BBC.
When asked why she’s chosen to continue to model in lingerie at her age, Ms Jacobson explained why doing so brings her so much pleasure.
“I do it for myself because it makes me feel self-confident and puts a little wiggle in my walk,” she said.
Many of Ms Jacobson’s followers have expressed their appreciation to the fashion blogger.
“I am turning 53 this week and I refuse to act my age! Why should I! You inspire me,” one person wrote on Instagram.
A post shared by Senior Style Bible (@seniorstylebible) on Feb 4, 2018 at 1:07pm PST
“I think it’s great. Why can’t you be sexy as you age? Why is sex as you age such a taboo?” another individual commented.
Ms Jacobson believes there’s no reason why anyone should let societal standards dictate what they wear or how they act in public simply because of how old they are.
“Women’s allure is not defined by a number,” she wrote on Instagram.