Working as a costume character at Disneyland California, Bella Golden was used to having her picture taken – albeit behind the guise of an animal suit – but never did she imagine she could pursue a career in modelling.
Growing up, Golden always felt uncomfortable in her body. She was tall, “kind of awkward”, and developed curves as soon as she hit puberty.
However, since adopting the “fake it until you make it” attitude, she’s finally learned to love herself and is now being tipped to become the next Ashley Graham.
She no longer works as a character performer at Disneyland and is now signed to Whilhelmina - one of the most prominent talent management agencies in the world.
So, how did it all start?
A long-time fan of body positive model Iskra Lawrence, Golden revealed how leaving a chance comment on her Instagram account launched her own career.
“I had been following her for a while and she posted something about body positivity, so I just commented something like ‘you look great girl’ and that’s how my agent found me,” Golden told Cosmopolitan.
“My profile was private but she followed me and then direct messaged me the next day asking if I was interested in modelling. I really thought it was a scam at first because unless watching a lot of America's Next Top Model counts, I had never done any modelling before.”
Wearing anything between a UK size 12 and 16, Golden is considered plus-size within the modelling industry and, while she admits that she doesn’t particularly agree with the term, she says she’s not offended by it as everyone’s different.
“People ask me 'how are you plus-size?', or 'it’s terrible you’re considered plus-size' but I don’t take it as a bad thing,” she explains.
“When I’m shopping online I realise from looking at the size guides and measurements, I never fit in one box but I think every girl has that struggle.
“So although I don't have a problem being labelled as plus-size, I do think the term is problematic in a sense because I don't like the idea of separation, that one group of people is superior to another.”
Golden says that social media helped her feel better about herself and, by posting things she would appreciate other people sharing, she hopes any young women who follow her can start to feel the same.
“I want any 14-year-old girl who follows me to feel comfortable in her body, so I purposefully go outside of my own comfort zone to show them a different body shape on a regular beach, rather than the 'perfect body' on a yacht somewhere,” she adds.
“The more different body types we show the better, that way young girls who are growing up now will have something they can identify with.”