Writers such as Sharon Horgan discuss why the ‘lovable drunk’ trope is a thing of the past, as complex comedy heroes are cleaning up
Sitcom history is strewn with big drinkers. Patsy in Absolutely Fabulous was incapable of sensible thought thanks to her insatiable appetite for champagne; Bernard Black in Black Books stoked his misanthropy with wine. The characters in M*A*S*H were often drunk to blunt the trauma of war. And in It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia – just because they felt like it. Bit-part comedy drinkers range from exaggerated monsters such as Father Jack in Father Ted and Barney Gumble in The Simpsons to the flippantly presented misery of Fun Bobby in Friends – Monica’s boyfriend who became “Ridiculously Dull Bobby” as soon as he wasn’t sloshed.
Recently, however, comedy has sobered up. On Netflix, Flaked sees Will Arnett play an alcoholic rebuilding his life. One half of the couple in Channel 4’s Catastrophe is a reformed drinker. In Love, the slacker sitcom whose third season has recently launched on Netflix, protagonist Mickey realises she’s an addict – of love and sex, but also alcohol and drugs – and starts to visit AA meetings. Meanwhile, Loudermilk, which appeared on Amazon Prime Video in January, stars Ron Livingston as Sam Loudermilk, an embittered Seattle divorcee who leads an addiction group and is himself an alcoholic in recovery.
“I’ve never met an alcoholic I didn’t like,” says Loudermilk co-creator Peter Farrelly, for whom the show is a move into more adult TV comedy after a career spent making wilfully crass movies such as Dumb and Dumber. “Such a big flaw humanises people, it makes them way more interesting. Right away the likability is up. Loudermilk is the ultimate asshole but because we know his flaws, we put up with it.”
Comedy’s thirst for teetotalism extends as far as mainstream sitcom Mom, which features Allison Janney and Anna Faris as a mother and daughter who are both in recovery. But sobriety is particularly suited to the new wave of nuanced, funny/serious “dramedy”, where the “sit” doesn’t reset neatly to zero and the characters’ mental health is in the foreground. A drinker whose recovery could derail at any point perfectly fits that bill.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Under the influence... Black Books, Father Ted and Absolutely Fabulous.
“There’s been a shift towards complicating protagonists in comedies,” observes AV Club critic Kyle Fowle. “Streaming services, and tastes in general, have changed the nature of sitcom: there’s room for punchlines and traditional episodic storytelling, but more often than not viewers want something more complex. Dramedy is interested in serialised storytelling, where conflicts aren’t resolved in a single episode. Shows that have characters struggling with addiction can explore storylines, consequences and triumphs over multiple episodes, while still having that comedy bent.”
The danger with comedies about something so serious is the laughs getting lost: either the show’s in poor taste or it’s simply a massive downer. Farrelly knew this was a trap to be avoided. “The thing I’m most proud of is Loudermilk’s not as depressing as most shows I’ve seen with AA-style programmes. Usually they paint a dreary picture of a bunch of sad sacks sitting around talking about their problems. It doesn’t have to be that way. People go to these meetings to be uplifted. There are a lot of laughs. Anyone in the programme will tell you.”
“Shows like Loudermilk go back to the idea that there’s a kernel of comedy within every tragedy,” says Steve Greene, a writer at IndieWire. “Part of getting past horrendous things is finding the weird ironies in what comes after.”
A sober protagonist also brings in-built tension to a comedy, because their determination to resist booze is a Chekhov’s gun: at some point they’ll succumb. Flaked pulls the trigger at the end of episode one, when we see that the bottle marked “Kombucha” that Will Arnett’s character keeps in the fridge is actually full of wine. Loudermilk retains that uncertainty for as long as possible.
I remember laughing at cocaine jokes on Saturday Night Live. We thought it was hysterical. Then John Belushi died Peter Farrelly
In Catastrophe’s very first scene, Rob Delaney’s character uses his drinking problem as an unconventional chat-up line: “I quit a few years ago, after I shit my pants at my sister’s wedding.” This announces the show as being about flawed adults, not sitcom caricatures. Then last year’s more downbeat third season depicted an unhappy “Rob” relapsing.
“We knew it was a potential disaster in our back pocket,” says Delaney’s co-star and co-writer Sharon Horgan. “We didn’t even know initially if we’d do anything with it. We just liked the idea that Sharon was someone for whom drink, and getting pissed, was a part of life, and seeing her involved with a sober alcoholic interested us. It took a long time for us to figure out how to deal with Rob falling off the wagon. We didn’t want the show to get so dark that it stopped being funny.”
Delaney himself is a sober alcoholic in real life, as is comedian Marc Maron, whose autobiographical sitcom Maron similarly saw the creator’s screen alter ego relapse. This trope of a performer acting out a scenario they hope never happens to them was bleakly flipped by Will Arnett when he made Flaked: after 15 years sober, during filming for season one he started drinking again and had to resume attending AA meetings.
Comedians who are willing to put their own trauma on screen are part of a change in culture, with stars increasingly open to discuss mental health. Meanwhile, a steady drip of deaths – Amy Winehouse and Philip Seymour Hoffman being two illustrations of how the battle for sobriety can suddenly be lost – has buried the idea of substance abuse being cool. In the real world, too, millennials drink less than preceding generations, and Dry January gets bigger every year. In this context, an old-school lush might not get laughs.
Farrelly acknowledges that shows such as Loudermilk signal a shift in what we consider funny. “When I was a kid, Dean Martin went on The Tonight Show drunk: slurring his words, messing everything up. We had the town drunk in [1960s sitcom] The Andy Griffith Show. It’s not as funny any more. I remember laughing at all the cocaine jokes on Saturday Night Live. We thought it was hysterical. Then [John] Belushi died.”
“The fact that recovery is the subject of popular TV, and especially comedies, reflects a change in culture,” says Dr James Nicholls, director of research and policy development at Alcohol Research UK. “We’re more ready to discuss recovery. This is to do with less stigma around mental health issues but also a wider recognition that ‘recovery’ is a positive journey that many people take, and achieve successfully.”
Addiction counsellor Simon Leigh agrees, though he points out that the US, the home of these series where recovery is the central theme, is ahead of us: “In America, alcoholism and addiction are treated as an illness. There’s not enough education about addiction in this country. If you have a drinking problem in America you go to rehab. If you have a drinking problem in England you go to the pub!”
For the grown-up TV comedies of the 21st century, however, the pub is no longer the place. Heavy drinking used to mean easy laughs; now, that well has run dry.