The British Academy of Film and Television Arts has announced that the production team behind Game of Thrones will be honoured with the BAFTA Special Award at this year’s British Academy Television Craft Awards.
The Special Awards recognises both the 'outstanding contribution to revolutionising and pushing the boundaries' within the various production areas, and 'the support the series has provided for the television industry in the UK.'
Game of Thrones, now in production on its eight and final season from its Northern Ireland production HQ, is television on a scale never seen before.
No expense or time has been spared on the show, especially with these final episodes, the season 8 team having recently completed a 55 consecutive night shoot for one mammoth battle scene.
“This award recognises and celebrates the excellent craftsmanship of the entire production team behind Game of Thrones," said Krishnendu Majumdar, Chair of BAFTA’s Television Committee. "The craft behind what is one of the most popular dramas of our time is nothing short of incredible, from the breath-taking location shots to the intricately designed costumes and set pieces, and not forgetting the level of detail from the makeup and prosthetics team to name a few. Huge congratulations to everyone involved.”
Speaking on behalf of the whole production team, showrunners and executive producers D. B. Weiss and David Benioff responded: “This award makes us extremely happy on behalf of the people who actually earned it - all our brilliant, talented, hard-working department heads and crew. Many, many people work insanely hard to create any film or television show.
"They are creators every bit as much as actors, writers, producers or directors, and deserve to be recognised as such."
GoT actors John Bradley and Hannah Murray will accept the award at the British Academy Television Craft Awards on 22 April 2018, which for the first time will be live-streamed on YouTube and Twitter.
Season 8 is expected on HBO, Sky Atlantic and NOWTV in 2019.