Giovanna Fletcher has spoken out against people who use the term “real” when describing women’s bodies in a candid Instagram post.
“Talking about ‘real’ bodies can’t be done without body shaming those who have the bodies we’ve been relentlessly told we should strive to achieve,” the YouTuber and author writes, “which really goes against what praising and embracing our different body shapes is meant to do in the first place.”
The pregnant mother-of-two uploaded the snap of herself wearing a black swimsuit while on holiday with her children.
“‘Real’ bodies, ‘real’ women, ‘real’ mums... I’m pretty sure we’re all ‘real’ no matter our sizes,” she continued.
“If we have flawless skin or cellulite and stretch marks, or if we’re an apple, pear, oval, diamond or hourglass.
"Our bodies should be seen as wonderfully unique, not something to be ashamed of - or something people might judge us over.”
The young mother, whose husband is McFly frontman, Tom Fletcher, continued to urge her followers to make judgements based on “actions and words” rather than someone’s lack of a thigh gap, or their “muscular abs” and “slender frame”.
“I still have moments where I doubt myself,” she added, “where I think before stripping down to my swimwear, but then I remember how much my body has given me (and continues to give me) and I decide to get into that blooming pool and splash around with my beautiful boys.
“Better than that, I love every second.
“Don’t let your body hold you back, whatever your shape and size. Don’t judge or compare. Be you... be the best you in that moment. Xxx”
Fletcher’s heartfelt post comes shortly after she was lambasted online for posting a makeup-free selfie, with trolls labelling her "a bit of a mess”.
The 33-year-old’s most recent post went down very well with her 962,000 followers, with fans praising Fletcher for her inspiring words and complimenting her on her own figure.
“This is really refreshing to read,” wrote one commenter.
“We shouldn’t beat ourselves up all the time! You look fab btw”.
“What a wonderful, true and honest thing to say,” added another, “yes we are all beautiful regardless what size, shape or imperfections we may have..you look stunning by the way, and so very happy..much love x”.