Britons saddled with high-interest “doorstep loans” should be given the same protection as people with payday loans and be saved millions of pounds’ worth of excess charges a year, said Citizens Advice.
In the UK, more than 1.6 million people use loans sold door-to-door – which are also known as home credit – and the market is one of the largest for high-cost credit, the charity warned.
Consumers typically end up paying back more than twice what they borrowed, the charity claimed. It said “irresponsible lending and the increased cost of borrowing due to refinancing, pushing home-credit users into a spiral of debt” was a growing concern.
A Citizens Advice report, entitled Doorway to Debt, published on 19 March, claims that extending the rules that cover payday loans to the doorstep lending market could save up to £123m in interest payments on up to 540,000 loans each year.
Payday loans are capped. Now let’s tackle other high-cost credit | Gillian Guy Read more
The charity said the Financial Conduct Authority’s curb on the payday loans market in recent years meant consumers were generally paying less for loans and were more able to repay them on time. The clampdown capped the overall cost of these loans to consumers, a measure aimed at preventing payday loan borrowers from becoming sucked into more debt.
“There’s no questioning the evidence, the FCA’s cap on payday lending has been a success,” said Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice. “But it’s time now to address the problems consumers are facing in the home credit market. Home credit customers are susceptible to the high cost of these loans because of easy refinancing, and there is currently no total limit on what they repay.”
In 2017, the charity helped 340,000 people with debt problems, an estimated 30,000 of whom were struggling to repay doorstep loans, some trying to cope with lenders charging interest rates of up to 1,557%.
Of those 30,000, the charity said, 48% had a long-term health condition or disability and only 32% were in work. Half had council tax arrears and 43% were behind on their water bill payments.
A spokeswoman for the FCA said: “Doorstep lending is one of the areas of high-cost credit we have identified as having potential issues. As we made clear in January, we have concerns about the impact on consumers who take out repeat loans. We intend to publish our conclusions in May and take action where we find harm.”