How to tie a tie may seem like a simple question for those who’ve been doing it since their schools days, but do you know your Windsor knot from your Pratt knot?
Are you short or have a tiny head? Do you prefer thicker or skinnier ties? All kinds of factors can be taken into account to choose the ideal knot.
But first things first, here’s probably the most basic option out there - the four-in-hand knot:
Four-in-Hand
Drape the tie so the wide part is longer than the narrow part. Vary these relative lengths dependent on how long you want the final result to be. Cross the wide part over the narrow part then bring it under and loop it up over again. Pull it up through the opening at the neck and insert it downwards through the neck loop. Adjust the knot by sliding it upward with one hand and holding the tails with the other.
For those looking to get that classic triangular shape, the Windsor knot is hard to beat. You can also alter the size of your knot by dabbling with the half-Windsor and double-Windsor.
Full-Windsor
Drape the tie so the wide end is on the right side and extends about 12 inches below the narrow end. Cross the wide part of the tie over the narrow part, then pull it up through the neck loop and downwards. Bring the wide end downwards to the right of the narrow part and loop it round. Pull the wide end up through the opening at the neck and bring it downwards through the neck loop. Adjust the knot by sliding it upward.
Check out this video tutorial to find out more about the variations of the Windsor knot and how it got its name.
For the skinny tie connoisseurs out there, the Pratt knot may be the best option as it gives you a thinner knot than the variations on the Windsor.
If you want to take your tie game to the next level, then go for the Trinity knot where you tie the narrow part of the tie around the other, or the intricate design of the Eldredge. The latter is for those wanting to make a “bold statement”, according to theknot.com.
For more detailed information and step-by-step instructions for all the different knots at your fingertips, visit The Knot’s comprehensive guide.
Even people who have been tying ties all their life can get all tangled when faced with the necktie’s more formal cousin - the bow tie.
More complicated than with standard ties, the bow tie requires a trickier knot to but it’s all worth it to get that suave look for your upcoming black-tie event.
Bow Tie
Place the bow tie around the neck so that the right end falls about 1.5 inches lower than the other. Cross the longer end over the shorter one and loop the longer end up through the neck hole. Adjust the tightness so it fits comfortably. Putting the longer end aside, double the shorter end at the widest part so it forms a bow across the collar. Holding the bow shape with one hand, retrieve the other end and pull it down over the centre of the bow shape with the other hand. Bring the sides of the bow together in front with one hand; pinch them and pull. This creates a hole behind the bow. Use the other hand to make another bow with the longer end of the tie by doubling it like the first bow and push this bow through the hole. Pull on the folded ends of each bow to tighten the knot of the bow tie.
If that sounded too complicated, see how it’s done in this video guide to help you master everything bow tie-related.
This article was originally published in December 2017