To find a group in your neighborhood, just search Facebook for “buy nothing” and your neighborhood (e.g. “buy nothing royal oak” rather than “buy nothing Detroit”). The smaller the group, the easier it is to browse and get stuff. You’ll also find related groups for buying and selling, which can be handy.
E-waste centers
Did you know you’re supposed to recycle old electronics? Most of those old gadgets have valuable materials that can be harvested and many cities have local recycling centers that will take your used electronics off your hands.
However, many of those recycling centers will also sell any of the working electronics that are donated to them — at bargain bin prices. You can find monitors, keyboards, networking gear, cables of all types and even old laptops or game systems for next to nothing. These organizations are tougher to find, but where I live, the University of San Diego has their own e-waste center, and many cities have an organization called Free Geek that offers something similar. Free Geek offers free computer classes, too, from basic PC use to coding. Your local university or state government may also have a surplus store where they sell used computers or even desks.
Baby resale stores
If you have kids, you know how expensive baby clothes can get — especially when the little tykes seem to grow out of them every few weeks. That’s why baby resale stores exist: They buy gently used clothes, toys and other items and resell them back to parents on a budget.
“Local parents bring in clothing, shoes, toys and baby gear (strollers, bassinets, etc.) and we check them out and decide what to buy,” says Paige Rigg, owner of Baby Go Round Resale in San Diego. She notes that they’re very careful about what they sell, too: “Items must be in clean condition; toys and gear must have batteries, all of their pieces, and be off the recall list.” They don’t resell car seats (which can be unsafe if they’ve ever been in an accident, or are past their expiration date), cribs (older models of which often have recalls or safety issues) and other items that might be unsafe or unsanitary for children. If you do choose to shop at a baby resale store, make sure the owners take this kind of safety seriously.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Smarter Living Newsletter A weekly roundup of the best advice from The Times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
There are also local and traveling consignment events for children’s items like Just Between Friends that you can visit as they happen.
Workout groups
Saving money isn’t just about getting stuff for less. Your community can also offer services for cheap or free, if you know where to look. Workouts are a prime example: Why spend money on a gym membership when you can work out with a highly motivated group of people in the park?
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
That’s exactly what November Project aims to do. Originally born in Boston, November Project is completely free, organized by volunteers and takes place in 45 cities around the world. Twice a week, these motivated people get together in the mornings to do workouts that include running, body weight exercises and circuit training. It’s intense and energetic, but the workouts are formulated so that people of varying skill levels can join — whether you’re an Olympic athlete or an average Joe or Jane looking to get in shape. Best of all, there’s no sign up required: Just show up. And if there isn’t a November Project in your area, you can start one — or find a similar group that almost certainly already exists.
The obvious: thrift stores, swap meets and Craigslist
We’d be remiss not to mention some of the more obvious options you already know about, like local thrift stores, consignment shops and swap meets. These types of organizations have been around forever and they can still be a great way to save money — though they’re usually better for browsing than trying to find something specific. (Remember that Goodwill isn’t the only thrift store around, either — there are probably locally owned ones that are less trafficked or specialize in different kinds of items.)
In addition, apps like Craigslist — and lesser-known counterparts like LetGo and OfferUp — are always great ways to find good deals on furniture, electronics or anything else you might be searching for. Cast a wide net and don’t be afraid to negotiate — any experienced seller will expect it and that’s how you go from a good deal to a great one.
How to find these organizations in your neighborhood
Every city and town is different, and finding the local version of the above organizations is the real challenge. If you know where to look, though, you can make things a bit easier on yourself. Be sure to check:
• Facebook: Facebook isn’t just for following friends and news outlets. The revamped Groups feature is a great way to find local community groups and a lot of the above organizations will have pages on Facebook, if you do a bit of searching.
• NextDoor: Billed as a social network for your neighborhood, NextDoor’s main feed is mostly full of people selling stuff (which itself can be useful). But you can also use the sidebar to look up events (often hosted by local organizations that you can look into), recommended businesses and people offering up services at a discount to their neighbors.
• Your city’s subreddit: If you’ve ever browsed Reddit, the internet’s community-for-literally-everything, you should check out the subreddit for your city. Below all the memes and cool photos of the skyline, you’ll find people asking about (or sharing) local business information, cool deals for local attractions and other useful information. You can even create a new thread asking for good places to find what you’re looking for!
• Yelp: Never discount the obvious: Yelp is still one of the best ways to find well-regarded local businesses. It might be tough if you aren’t sure what you’re even looking for, but when it comes to the more prevalent options like thrift stores and consignment shops, Yelp is a great place to find the best ones.
• Other organizations: You know the organizations I mentioned above? They partner with other organizations that have similar goals. For example, the University of San Diego’s e-waste center partners with a local church group called Jesus Geeks which provides, among other things, inexpensive “tech support” fund-raising nights, where you can get tech support for much less than what most big box stores charge. If you find an organization you like, poke around their website or related Facebook groups to see what else might interest you.
Once you get on a roll, you’ll be surprised how many great resources you can find right in your own neighborhood. Remember to pay it forward, too — if these organizations have helped you out, don’t be afraid to offer your own unwanted stuff for donation, too.