Have I got news for women? Not really. We already know men make the best clowns | Catherine Bennett Read more
“You’re a patronising git, aren’t you?” said Steph McGovern on last week’s Have I Got News For You (6 April, BBC1, 9.30pm), serving Jeremy Paxman his arse on a plate. As guest host, Paxman isn’t the first man to talk down to a female panellist on the show – this time, delivering supercilious praise when McGovern answered a question correctly – and, as long as it lumbers on, he won’t be the last.
Now into its 55th series, HIGNFY squats in the schedules like a smug toad, resolute in its if-it-ain’t-broke-don’t-fix-it folly. A festival of schoolboy sniggering, watching it is much like crashing a college reunion that’s gearing up for a rose-tinted game of soggy biscuit. One wonders if Will Self, in describing the show as “the very cockpit of British satire”, wasn’t being so flattering after all. While there are odd glimpses of the old humour, the mood is frequently toxic, with captains Ian Hislop and Paul Merton piling in on guests and then scratching their heads when producers struggle to find fresh ones.
The most recent upset came when Hislop and Merton were quizzed in the Radio Times about the absence of female guest hosts, specifically women MPs, to which they replied, “Everyone you think should have been asked has been.” The real problem, they decided, is that women are too modest to come on their show. You what, lads? If modesty is how you interpret a woman weighing up her options and deciding she’d rather feast on fire ants in the Australian jungle than endure your special brand of humiliation then perhaps that says more about you than them?
Apparently structural barriers are a figment of the female imagination
Editors could construct a sports-style montage out of the times that Hislop, Merton and male guests have talked over, patronised and bullied female panellists. For some choice lowlights, let me point you to the time Jimmy Carr jeered at Ann Widdecombe, “Ooh, take off your glasses, you’re beautiful”, or when Hislop and Merton interrogated Paula Yates about her breasts and choice of boyfriend. Their modest women theory is particularly precious when you consider the debate surrounding the gender pay gap and the claim made by an economist on a recent Today programme that men are paid more because of “choices freely made”. Apparently structural barriers are a figment of the female imagination, a consequence of all those hormones pulsing through our systems and paralysing our ability to see our own lack of ambition.
But back to HIGNFY and the search for the lesser-spotted female MP, which is now, by all accounts, rivalling the hunt for the yeti. Tip-off, chaps: Anna Soubry has said she’s game. But even the presence of more women – more, at least, than one per episode – won’t save this sinking vessel. Last week, Merton, who has napped through the show for at least a decade, did little more than the odd cartoon double take, and left Hislop’s pompous proclamations unpunctured. Meanwhile, Paxman bellowed pointlessly and Josh Widdicombe barely uttered a word. Rarely has a show appeared more tired, more flabby, more blunted by its own complacency. The time has come to put it out of its misery. To go quietly would surely be the modest thing to do.