Director, who has been accused of sexual assault or harassment by 395 women, ‘potentially’ violated laws but could not be charged due to statute of limitations
Film-maker James Toback potentially broke laws in four sexual abuse investigations but will not face charges because the allegations fall outside California’s statute of limitations, a prosecutor has ruled.
The Los Angeles County District Attorney’s office released documents on Monday that detailed investigations against Toback, who has reportedly been accused of sexual misconduct by 395 women.
Hollywood stars Selma Blair, Rachel McAdams and Julianne Moore are among those to make public allegations against Toback, who was nominated for an Oscar for writing 1991’s Bugsy.
A deputy district attorney reviewed five claims made by unidentified women against Toback, spanning the years between 1978 and 2008. They include the claim that the director exposed himself to a woman during a drive after she declined his request for sex when he “pushed her against a wall” in 1978, and a claim that Toback groped a woman while trying to get her to have sex with him in 1980.
Another woman claims she accompanied Toback to what was believed to be a private movie screening in 2008 where she “complied out of fear” at a request to masturbate. A separate accuser made a similar claim that he masturbated while clothed, this time in the Beverly Hills Hotel in 1993.
The remaining accuser spoke to law enforcement officers but did not attend an interview. The prosecutor said the case would be reviewed if she comes forward again.
The prosecutor said in all of the cases the statutory limitation period had ended and in four of them he “potentially” violated laws. The cases were investigated by police in Los Angeles and Beverly Hills, the district attorney’s office spokesman said.
Allegations against Toback emerged in the #MeToo movement ignited by the downfall of movie mogul Harvey Weinstein. Weinstein apologised for his past behaviour but denied all allegations of non-consensual sex after around 100 women accused him of sexual assault and harassment.
The Los Angeles Times first detailed accusations of sexual harassment against Toback from 38 women. But a further 357 came forward with fresh claims in the days that followed, the paper reported.
Toback denied the accounts published in the original LA Times report, saying he had never met any of the women, or if he had it “was for five minutes and [I] have no recollection”. Toback also claimed that for the last 22 years it had been “biologically impossible” for him to engage in the actions he is accused of, due to diabetes and a heart condition that required medication.