As part of the announcement, Mr. Huffman ended up causing an even bigger stir by answering a question from a user about whether open racism was prohibited on the site under Reddit’s rules. “It’s not,” Mr. Huffman replied, explaining that the company’s policies applied to users’ behavior, not their beliefs. After users objected, Mr. Huffman had to add a clarification: “To be perfectly clear, while racism itself isn’t against the rules, it’s not welcome here.”
Uber Branches Out
In Uber’s continuing quest to dominate all non-ambulatory modes of transportation, it reached another milestone this week with the acquisition of Jump Bikes, an electric bike-sharing start-up. The deal, reported by TechCrunch to be for more than $100 million, is the first acquisition made by Dara Khosrowshahi as the company’s chief executive, and it follows a successful bike-sharing test in San Francisco.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Interested in All Things Tech? The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
The company is also branching into car rentals, through a partnership with the car-booking service Getaround, and public transportation, with a deal with a mobile ticketing start-up called Masabi. Soon, Uber users will be able to buy bus and train tickets and rent cars inside the Uber app.
Notably, as my colleague Daisuke Wakabayashi pointed out, the Jump Bikes acquisition will be Uber’s first experience with actual inventory. In its core car-hailing business, drivers own their cars and connect them to Uber’s network, but Uber will own the bikes itself, and will need to learn how to manage its own fleet of two-wheeled vehicles.
China Cracks Down on Bytedance
My colleague Raymond Zhong had a great story this week about Bytedance, a Chinese internet start-up that has “mastered the art of keeping people glued to their smartphones.” Bytedance, which operates a collection of apps that connect users with news, viral videos and other forms of entertainment, drew the anger of Chinese internet censors.
The agency ordered Bytedance to shut down Neihan Duanzi, an app for silly videos and joke memes that “caused strong dislike among internet users,” according to China’s State Administration of Radio and Television. At least two other Bytedance apps have also disappeared from app stores.
It’s a fascinating look at the opposition faced by Chinese tech start-ups, which makes Facebook’s grilling before Congress look positively mild. And it’s a glimpse of the kind of dilemmas that could await Facebook if it ever does fulfill Mr. Zuckerberg’s long-held goal of getting into China.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
‘Despacito’ Goes M.I.A.
In devastating news for fans of catchy summer jams, the music video for “Despacito,” the Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee song, briefly disappeared from YouTube on Tuesday after hackers broke into the account of Vevo, the company that hosted the video. Other Vevo videos, by artists like Selena Gomez, Drake, Katy Perry and Taylor Swift, were also defaced by hackers calling themselves Prosox and Kuroi’sh.
Vevo told The Verge that it was investigating the source of the security breach. Meanwhile, the “Despacito” video, YouTube’s all-time most viewed video, has been restored. Whew.
Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.