Indeed, circumstances changed drastically over Hornacek’s two turbulent, losing seasons. Jackson, who was the president, has since departed for his Montana home, Anthony was traded to the Oklahoma City Thunder and Porzingis got hurt.
Hornacek’s tenure, which produced a record of 60-104, was troubled from the start. Anthony and Porzingis were not a natural pairing, and Jackson’s biggest moves — signing Joakim Noah and trading for Derrick Rose — were duds.
Without much talent to work with, the Knicks never established a clear identity, frustrating Hornacek with their defensive inconsistency (they ranked 22nd in defense) and looking a step behind the league’s best offenses. Hornacek’s dismissal was an expected part of the new regime’s efforts to retool the team.
Before coaching his final game on Wednesday night in Cleveland, Hornacek told reporters that he would “love to continue with these guys.”
“We didn’t think it was going to be a one-year turnaround,” Hornacek said.
He added: “You expect a rebuilding situation to go out there and win 50 games? That’s why they call it rebuilding. But when you mention rebuilding, you’re still trying to win games.”
But Hornacek will no longer lead that turnaround. (He had one year left on his three-year, $15 million contract.)
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Hornacek, 54, was hired to instill Jackson’s coaching philosophies — namely, the triangle offense — and compete for a spot in the playoffs. Perry, who was hired last summer as Jackson’s replacement, retained Hornacek at the time to maintain a level of continuity in hopes of retooling around Porzingis, the Knicks’ franchise player. Over the course of the season, the Knicks’ front office evaluated the team’s performance in 10-game increments.
Before Christmas, the Knicks had a 16-14 record, and making the playoffs seemed feasible. Porzingis was averaging 24 points and 6.5 rebounds per game. But the Knicks began to struggle in early January, and Porzingis suffered a season-ending knee injury on Feb. 6 when the team was in the middle of an eight-game losing streak. The Knicks shifted their focus to improving their draft lottery odds.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Hornacek’s position suddenly seemed untenable. Since the end of January, the Knicks went 5-26 and Hornacek got into a physical altercation with Noah at a practice.
After the incident, Noah was kept away from the team for the rest of the season, but the tension recalled earlier locker room friction that had contributed to Hornacek’s departure as coach of the Phoenix Suns 46 games into the 2016 season.
At the news conference, Mills and Perry stuck to largely the same, diplomatic speech they gave at Perry’s introductory news conference: The Knicks are rebuilding. Perry preached that “patience is required” to build a winning team that is sustainable — a change in rhetoric from Knicks managements of the past.
“There are no quick fixes,” he said. “I know that has been tried a number of times here in the past, but I think it is important that we as an organization remain disciplined.”
The Knicks did not give a timeline for hiring a new coach. Two names that have surfaced as possible successors: Doc Rivers and Mark Jackson. Rivers, who played for the Knicks from 1992 to 1994, is the coach of the Los Angeles Clippers. Jackson, who coached the Golden State Warriors from 2011 to 2014, played for the Knicks from 1987 to 1992 and again in 2001 and 2002.
“All three years I’ve been here have been losing records,” said Tim Hardaway Jr., who signed with the Knicks shortly before Perry became general manager last summer. “This would, career-wise, be going on my fifth coach. It is all up to management what they want to do. I am on board with their decisions, and the new season starts right now.”
A new season begins, and the rebuilding process continues.