The tension is rising and the nerves are beginning to show as runners prepare to take part in the London Marathon 2018.
With just over a week until the grand event, racegoers and spectators alike will be making preparations to ensure that they’re as ready as possible for the big day.
As one of the long-distance races included in the World Marathon Majors, alongside the Tokyo, Boston, Berlin, Chicago and New York City marathons, millions will be watching as elite and amateur runners make their way across the capital to the finish line opposite Buckingham Palace.
A post shared by Virgin Money London Marathon (@londonmarathon) on Apr 26, 2017 at 8:16am PDT
Here’s everything you need to know about the London Marathon 2018:
When is it?
The Virgin Money London Marathon will be taking place on Sunday April 22, with the Queen being the official starter for this year’s race.
The Queen will push the button to mark the beginning of the mass race at 10.00 from the grounds of Windsor Castle.
It will be the 38th London Marathon to have occurred since the first on March 29 1981.
The Elite Wheelchair Races will begin at 08.55, while the World Para Athletics Marathon World Cup ambulant races will start at 09.00.
The runners competing in the Elite Women’s Race will set off at 09.15.
The Elite Men’s Race, the British Athletics & England Athletics Marathon Championships and the mass race will all start at 10.00.
What’s the route?
The route of the Virgin Money London Marathon from mile 8 to 22 (Virgin Money London Marathon)
The route begins on Blackheath, which is located in the south east of London.
The runners will make their way through Greenwich before passing over the Thames as they cross Tower Bridge.
The route will continue through central London, where thousands upon thousands of avid spectators will cheer on the runners.
As the racegoers turn the bend at Buckingham Palace, all they’ll have left is the stretch of The Mall before completing the treacherous 26.2 miles and crossing over the finish line.
Will it air on TV?
A post shared by Virgin Money London Marathon (@londonmarathon) on Apr 10, 2018 at 9:47am PDT
The London Marathon will indeed air on TV, with coverage being made available to watch live on BBC 1 and BBC 2.
The race will be covered on BBC 1 from 08.30 until 14.00, before switching to BBC 2.
Should you prefer to watch the elite runners over the mass race, you can click on the BBC red button where additional coverage will be on offer.
Where should spectators go to watch in person?
For those of you choosing to venture into London to support your friends, family, loved ones or just anyone taking part, you should be warned that the city will be packed.
By downloading the Virgin Money London Marathon app, which will soon be available to download for free for iPhone and Android, you’ll be able to find and track certain runners.
The app will also provide you with specific points of interest throughout the route in addition to first aid points, drinks stations, music spots and pub venues if you fancy a pint during the day.
Areas along the route such as Greenwich and Tower Bridge will likely be the most popular destinations for dedicated spectators, so try and arrive early if you want to bag a good space.
There are a few spots that are particularly advantageous for watching friends or family taking part, as they’ll end up passing the same point twice.
A post shared by Virgin Money London Marathon (@londonmarathon) on Mar 27, 2018 at 3:50pm PDT
Mile 13 and 22 near Wapping pass by one another, as do mile 15 and 18 by Heron Quays.
Joining the throng at Embankment will also feel quite special, as the runners prepare to take on the final mile of the marathon.
What happens at the end?
When you’ve made your way down The Mall to the sound of adoring cheers and the melody of Heather Small’s Proud playing on the overhead speakers, then the hard part is well and truly over.
However, trying to find your friends or family post-race is a task all on its own.
Having been awarded your finisher’s medal and belongings, you can then make your way to the meeting area in Horse Guards Parade.
The London Marathon warns that the process of exiting the finishing area once you’ve collected all of your things can take up to 40 minutes.
Once in Horse Guards Parade, you’ll see that the area has been adorned with huge letters of the alphabet.
Make sure you choose a letter from A-Z before the race so that you have a meeting point with which to regroup with your loved ones, as phone signal may be hazy in the excitement of the day.
Once you’ve all found each other you'll be able to relax, take a deep breath and thank goodness it's all over.