Mobile adventure game Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery, which will allow players to become students at the wizarding school, will be launched on 25 April
Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery, the much-anticipated mobile adventure game that will allow players to become a student at the wizarding school, will be launched on 25 April, developer Jam City has announced.
The game, which was revealed on the Pottermore site last autumn, will also feature six actors reprising their roles from the Harry Potter movies, including Michael Gambon as Professor Dumbledore, Dame Maggie Smith as Professor McGonagall and Warwick Davis as Professor Flitwick.
Also appearing are Sally Mortemore as Madam Irma Pince, Gemma Jones as Madam Pomfrey and Zoë Wanamaker as Madam Hooch.
Described as a story-driven mobile narrative role-playing game, Hogwarts Mystery will see players creating their own student characters, attending classes, learning spells and taking part in Duelling Club. It will be possible to build friendships – and rivalries – as the story evolves, with key decisions affecting the character arc, while a new encounter system will provide pivotal moments that will shape each quest.
“Our goal with Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery is to make players really feel for the first time like they’re attending Hogwarts,” said Chris DeWolfe, co-founder and CEO of Jam City. “By including these iconic and incredibly talented actors in the game, we come one step closer to truly giving fans their own Hogwarts experience.”
This is the first new Harry Potter game in several years, following Sony’s augmented reality experiment Wonderbook: Book of Spells, and the first release from Warner Bros’s dedicated Harry Potter games publishing label, Portkey Games. Jam City, which is based in Los Angeles, has experience in the competitive mobile market – its free-to-play titles Panda Pop and Cookie Jam have attracted millions of users on smartphone and Facebook. It also has experience with major entertainment brands, having produced Family Guy and Avengers tie-ins.
Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery will be available on iOS and Android devices on 25 April.