Rory McIlroy was delighted to break 70 in the first round of the Masters for just the second time as he chases the win required to complete the career grand slam.
McIlroy ended the day three shots behind 2015 champion Jordan Spieth after a 69 which contained four birdies and just one bogey, the 28-year-old crucially making superb par saves on the last three holes.
“Jordan had a pretty strong finish there but this is my best start in a few years,” McIlroy said. “It’s such a hard golf course to play catch-up on. If you start to chase it around here, that’s when you start to make mistakes.
The Masters 2018 - the contenders
13 show all The Masters 2018 - the contenders
1/13 Who will win the Masters? The 2018 Masters promises to be one of the most hotly-contested in recent years with a host of the world's best players heading into Augusta in red-hot form. But who will come out on top? Getty
2/13 Dustin Johnson (USA) The world number one has the power game to make Augusta National look very small indeed. How his short game and putting fare will decide how close he gets. Getty
3/13 Justin Thomas (USA) A winner at the Honda Classic in March the 24-year-old American heads to Georgia as one of the form horses and looks primed and ready to challenge for a Major for a second successive time after winning the PGA last time out. Getty
4/13 Jon Rahm (ESP) The fiery Spaniard exploded on to the scene a year ago and arrived in Augusta as the consensus dark horse pick. It wasn't to be then but the world number three certainly has everything to contend and will fancy his chances. Getty
5/13 Jordan Spieth (USA) The former world number one knows exactly what it takes to win around Augusta and has the game to match. If he drives the ball well expect him to be at the sharp end come week's end. Getty
6/13 Justin Rose (ENG) Finally at home at the very top of the world game Augusta will hold no fears for the world number five. Will be hoping to go one better than in 2017 when he missed out to Sergio Garcia in a thriller. Getty
7/13 Rory McIlroy (NIR) The Northern Irishman clinched his first victory since September 2016 at Bay Hill and looks to finally be returning to his best. Can he finally get his hands on the Green Jacket and complete the career Grand Slam? Getty
8/13 Sergio Garcia (ESP) The defending champion finally got over the Major hump a year ago and will be eager to show that famous afternoon wasn't a one off. If his putter gets hot don't rule him out. Getty
9/13 Jason Day (AUS) Another former world number one who will head to Augusta full of hope of breaking his Masters duck. Second way back in 2011 the Australian will hope his famously fearsome putting holds true to put him in the mix come Sunday. Getty
10/13 Henrik Stenson (SWE) Heads into the week in good form and while Augusta doesn't hold particularly fond memories for him the Swede has the game to tame the famous old course if everything clicks. Getty
11/13 Phil Mickelson (USA) A three-time winner Mickelson knows exactly how to get it done here. What's more he arrives in fine form after a win at the WGC Mexico Championship to end a five-year streak without one. Could his otherworldly short game put old Lefty in with a shot once again? Getty
12/13 Bubba Watson (USA) Bubba loves Augusta and Augusta loves Bubba. This famous old course favours those willing to take a chance or two and they don't come much more creative than the eccentric American. Getty
13/13 Tiger Woods (USA) A 42-year-old wouldn't usually be one of the favourites here but Woods is no ordinary 42-year-old. Playing his best golf in nearly a decade Tiger really does look ready to challenge for a Major again and a win - a fifth at Augusta - would surely cap one of the great sporting comebacks. He couldn't, could he? Getty
“But to be right up there and have the ability to stay patient, because of the position I’m in, that’s a nice luxury I have over the next few days.
“I drove it well. Everything was really solid. And if I can continue to play like that over the next three days, I’ll be pretty close.
“It was a much different golf course today than what we’ve seen in practice. The SubAir (system) must have been running nearly all night. That’s Augusta. That’s what we sign up to whenever we come here. You know it’s going to be firm and fast.
“Harry (Diamond, his caddie) said this place was at least five or six shots tougher today than it was when we played last week.”
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.