Dustin Johnson admits there is no avoiding the memories of last year's painful withdrawal as he tries to become the first world number one since 2002 to win the Masters.
Johnson was the pre-tournament favourite 12 months ago after winning his previous three events, only to suffer a back injury after slipping on a small set of stairs in his rented house on the Wednesday afternoon.
The former US Open champion completed a warm-up on the range ahead of the first round under the watchful eye of coach Butch Harmon and looked set to compete, only to suddenly leave the first tee and head back into the clubhouse.
The Masters 2018 - the contenders
13 show all The Masters 2018 - the contenders
1/13 Who will win the Masters? The 2018 Masters promises to be one of the most hotly-contested in recent years with a host of the world's best players heading into Augusta in red-hot form. But who will come out on top? Getty
2/13 Dustin Johnson (USA) The world number one has the power game to make Augusta National look very small indeed. How his short game and putting fare will decide how close he gets. Getty
3/13 Justin Thomas (USA) A winner at the Honda Classic in March the 24-year-old American heads to Georgia as one of the form horses and looks primed and ready to challenge for a Major for a second successive time after winning the PGA last time out. Getty
4/13 Jon Rahm (ESP) The fiery Spaniard exploded on to the scene a year ago and arrived in Augusta as the consensus dark horse pick. It wasn't to be then but the world number three certainly has everything to contend and will fancy his chances. Getty
5/13 Jordan Spieth (USA) The former world number one knows exactly what it takes to win around Augusta and has the game to match. If he drives the ball well expect him to be at the sharp end come week's end. Getty
6/13 Justin Rose (ENG) Finally at home at the very top of the world game Augusta will hold no fears for the world number five. Will be hoping to go one better than in 2017 when he missed out to Sergio Garcia in a thriller. Getty
7/13 Rory McIlroy (NIR) The Northern Irishman clinched his first victory since September 2016 at Bay Hill and looks to finally be returning to his best. Can he finally get his hands on the Green Jacket and complete the career Grand Slam? Getty
8/13 Sergio Garcia (ESP) The defending champion finally got over the Major hump a year ago and will be eager to show that famous afternoon wasn't a one off. If his putter gets hot don't rule him out. Getty
9/13 Jason Day (AUS) Another former world number one who will head to Augusta full of hope of breaking his Masters duck. Second way back in 2011 the Australian will hope his famously fearsome putting holds true to put him in the mix come Sunday. Getty
10/13 Henrik Stenson (SWE) Heads into the week in good form and while Augusta doesn't hold particularly fond memories for him the Swede has the game to tame the famous old course if everything clicks. Getty
11/13 Phil Mickelson (USA) A three-time winner Mickelson knows exactly how to get it done here. What's more he arrives in fine form after a win at the WGC Mexico Championship to end a five-year streak without one. Could his otherworldly short game put old Lefty in with a shot once again? Getty
12/13 Bubba Watson (USA) Bubba loves Augusta and Augusta loves Bubba. This famous old course favours those willing to take a chance or two and they don't come much more creative than the eccentric American. Getty
13/13 Tiger Woods (USA) A 42-year-old wouldn't usually be one of the favourites here but Woods is no ordinary 42-year-old. Playing his best golf in nearly a decade Tiger really does look ready to challenge for a Major again and a win - a fifth at Augusta - would surely cap one of the great sporting comebacks. He couldn't, could he? Getty
"I get asked about it every day out here on the range or walking down the fairway," Johnson said. "I'm reminded all the time. It is what it is.
"It was kind of just a freak thing and it happened. There's nothing I can do about it except I'm here this year, hopefully I can tee it up on Thursday, and I'll definitely be looking forward to that.
"Coming into last year obviously I was playing very well and it was very disappointing not to be able to play, but it was a year ago so a lot of things have happened since then. I'm always excited to come back here and play. I feel like the game is in really good shape and got a lot of confidence coming into here this week.
"I know what it takes to get it done in a major, and it's never easy. I've been in this situation quite a few times where I've had a chance to win, and no matter what you do or how you prepare, it's not easy to win. This week's going to be no different.
"My preparation's been very good though leading into this week. I came up here last Tuesday, Wednesday and got a couple good practice rounds in and then came back up Sunday and started my prep again."
The first of Johnson's three straight wins in 2017 took him to world number one for the first time and he has stayed there ever since.
But the 33-year-old's position at the top of the rankings is under threat from US PGA champion Justin Thomas, who can replace his fellow American in top spot with solo fifth place or better if Johnson misses the cut.
"I try not to think about it too much, especially if I'm on the golf course because it doesn't really matter," Johnson said of his ranking position. "But sometimes I'll sit and think about it. It's a pretty big accomplishment and I'm definitely proud of myself for making it to number one, but most importantly I want to stay here. To do that I got to keep pushing myself and keep working hard."
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.