The daughter of the deputy speaker of the House of Commons was in a “toxic” relationship before being found dead in her bedroom, an inquest has heard. Natalie Lewis-Hoyle, 28, died in Heybridge, Essex, on 15 December.
The hearing in Chelmsford was told that the young parish councillor was full of life and had a “whole bundle of energy”. Her mother, Miriam Lewis, said she had been reflecting on a troubled relationship before her death, but was “finally coming to terms with the fact that it wasn’t going to go anywhere”.
Essex police concluded there were no suspicious circumstances or third-party involvement in Lewis-Hoyle’s death, and this was accepted by the court.
But both her parents, who attended along with their partners, said they were troubled by phone calls they believed had affected their daughter’s state of mind. They said she had expressed no intention to kill herself.
Lewis-Hoyle had been collected by her mother from Hatfield Peverel railway station on 14 December and had a blood alcohol level of 171mg per 100ml.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Lindsay Hoyle, the deputy speaker of the House of Commons. Photograph: PA Wire/PA
The coroner, Caroline Beasley-Murray, said she wanted to put this figure in context: “She wasn’t driving and it was a weeknight before Christmas.”
Lewis found her daughter hanged at home the next morning and she was pronounced dead at 6.46am.
Her father, Lindsay Hoyle, the Labour MP for Chorley, said he believed what happened had been “a reaction to that phone call [which] had left somebody in a different state of mind than what they had been in [before]”.
Lewis, a Conservative Maldon district councillor, said: “I’m afraid, for me, I accept that within the law as it stands at the time, there was no third-party involvement, but it’s not something that I am going to be able to put out of my head.”
She said there had been an “attack”, the details of which were not given, a few weeks before, at a time when her daughter’s relationship “was really, really deteriorating”. The coroner said: “She was in a somewhat troubled relationship.” Lewis responded: “A very toxic relationship.”
Lewis said of her daughter: “When somebody is in psychological torment, you don’t get the bruises and the fat lips and the black eyes.”
Beasley-Murray recorded an open conclusion. “We haven’t got all of the bits of the jigsaw,” she said. “We will never quite know what was going through her mind, so that’s what I am going to record.”
Lewis-Hoyle had been the chairwoman of the environment committee at Heybridge parish council and was “clearly much loved”, the coroner said.
Hoyle said: “She was a person that loved life. She was life. She brought life to everybody.”
Lewis said: “She was a tiny person, a teeny, tiny person. She was a pocket rocket. She was just a whole bundle of energy.”