My Year With the Tribe (BBC Two) is an unsettling documentary. Its presenter, Will Millard, an upbeat writer and expedition leader who seems cut from the cloth of 90s Jamie Oliver, sets out to West Papua in Indonesia to document the holy grail sought by many anthropological documentary-makers – a society untouched by the modern world. Millard has visited the region many times before and speaks Indonesian, but he has yet to meet the remote Korowai people. So, he heads into the rainforest without any fixed plans, in the hope that a “traditional” family will let him film with them for a sustained period. “I want to try something different,” he explains, aware that this has been attempted before, offering four visits over the course of a year as his USP.
The twist has been revealed in advance and picked over in the papers already. The Korowai are not as remote a tribe as they once were. They have smartphones, generators and a school. Many of their famous treehouses, built high off the rainforest floor, were constructed for the benefit of previous documentaries, including the BBC’s 2011 series Human Planet. With a growing sense of confusion and disappointment, Millard realises he is being performed to by the people he meets. First, there is Markus, who assumes the role of a treehouse-dweller, but it soon becomes clear that this is a show for the cameras. Markus has a list of prices for “activities”, from hunting for grubs to cooking rat. He sings as he is cooking a meal: “We weren’t like this before.”
But Markus is not the only one in on this presentation of tribe life. In the end, we are left with the shell of the documentary that Millard thought he was going to make, propped up by an existential crisis about authenticity, artifice and encroaching modernity.
As fascinating as that is, it left me uneasy. Much of the first episode seems more concerned with Millard’s feelings about his thwarted adventure than with the people who have intrigued him for so long. That may be a result of necessity. Once it becomes clear that the Korowai have seen wide-eyed film crews plenty of times before, the focus of the documentary becomes documentary-making. It turns into an ethical quagmire and I am not sure that My Year With the Tribe escapes from it simply by addressing that fact.
There is a paradox in Millard’s despair. He seems frustrated that a cash economy, which he puts down to outside visitors, has changed what he had hoped to find. There is some agonised self-flagellation about being part of the problem – “Look around you, mate, you made this” – but he remains determined to be the person to find the remote tribe that has eluded him, in spite of the fact that the search for it turns into “a bit of a disaster” in places, as he admits. Having seen the effects of documentaries such as this being made again and again, he continues to attempt to make one. Perhaps this will be addressed in the remaining two episodes, but something about this jarringly frank series makes me wonder if it will be the last of its kind – and whether that would be such a bad thing.
After a well-received pilot, the sketch show Famalam (BBC Two) has been given a four-episode series, first shown online on BBC Three. It is good-natured, daft and occasionally incisive, with its initial sketch laying out its wry wit to particularly sharp effect: a black superhero takes out a gang of drug dealers and stands, triumphantly and expectantly, as the police arrive on the scene. Cut to him being thrown across the bonnet of the car, in cuffs, as “suspect: black male” crackles across the radio and the dealers are handed hot chocolate and blankets.
Plenty has been written about how sketch comedy has been revived by the internet’s appetite for brief, shareable clips (one of the stars of Famalam, Tom Moutchi, made his name on Vine) and this certainly feels as if it could exist in isolated, Facebook-friendly bursts. The sketches are rapid-fire and rarely outstay their welcome. Some, like the gag about racist swiping on dating apps, are one-note jokes that pass in a flash. Others, such as the Blaxploitation-flecked countryside crime of Midsomer Motherfuckin’ Murders, luxuriate in a more drawn-out silliness. My favourite was the aunties’ western-inspired showdown over leftovers. It is not hard to see Famalam’s punchlines coming long before they land, but they fly past in such a frenzy of energy that it is hard to mind.