Leslie A. Lanusse, a lawyer representing the Saints, said the franchise strives to treat all employees fairly and denied that the franchise had discriminated against Ms. Davis because of her gender. “At the appropriate time and in the appropriate forum, the Saints will defend the organization’s policies and workplace rules,” Ms. Lanusse said in an email.
The N.F.L. declined to comment. The Ravens did not respond to questions about their current policies. The Bengals said they had updated their rules for cheerleaders and no longer have precise weight guidelines.
Unlike N.F.L. players, who are unionized and generally free to promote themselves in any way they choose, cheerleaders are part-time workers with few benefits. A few teams, including the Chicago Bears, the Giants and the Pittsburgh Steelers, do not employ cheerleaders. Most of the more than two dozen other teams with cheerleaders outline the rules and restrictions in the cheerleaders’ contracts and handbooks.
Other rules are applied as a specific reaction to an ever-changing social environment. Cheerleaders who complain about the conditions are told that they can easily be replaced. The threats are not empty. In this employee-employer relationship, the teams have all the leverage.
“The club’s intention is to completely control the behavior of the women, even when they are not actually at their workplace,” said Leslie Levy, who represented cheerleaders who sued the Jets and the Oakland Raiders. “It’s an issue of power. You see a disparate treatment between the cheerleaders, and the mascots and anyone else who works for the team. I can’t think of another arena where employers exert this level of control, even when they are not at work.”
Ms. Levy and other lawyers have had some success. In 2016 the Jets agreed to pay their cheerleaders, known as The Flight Crew, almost $325,000 in back pay. The Raiders agreed to $1.25 million in back pay for the Raiderettes. (The Raiders did not respond to questions about their cheerleading policies.)
Photo
Despite increases in pay, the rules persist in part because supply outweighs demand. Most teams employ only a few dozen cheerleaders, who must audition along with hundreds of other candidates every year to keep their jobs. In the case of the Saints, cheerleaders are limited to a maximum of four years with the club. Yet thousands of women are eager to join the squad.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
To be sure, there are cheerleaders for whom the good experiences far outweigh the bad.
“Cheerleading changed my life,” said Flavia Berys, a former cheerleader for the San Diego Chargers who wrote books on audition secrets and became a real estate lawyer. “When I was an N.F.L. cheerleader, I learned a lot about how to speak to the media, I learned about the rules of decorum and professionalism. We were taught how to interact with the staff and the players, and everything. The training we had was all for a reason, and looking back, I think it was all for the right reasons.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Nearly every N.F.L. team owner is a man, though some cheerleader programs are run by female executives. The league lets the teams establish their own rules for cheerleading squads.
Cheerleaders are seen as an integral part of the game-day experience, well-established entertainment that fans and television networks have come to expect at sports stadiums. For decades, many teams have subscribed to the philosophy that sex sells, so cheerleaders dress in skimpy outfits, wave pompoms and dance suggestively throughout football games, where the majority of fans are men.
But for all their upbeat energy on game days, cheerleaders toil under intense scrutiny, based on the rules included in the handbooks issued by nearly a dozen N.F.L. teams, as well as many of the unwritten rules of the job.
For several years, the cheerleaders for the Saints, the Saintsations, had to sell glossy calendars of themselves in bikinis. Before each home game, cheerleaders walked outside the stadium and tried to sell their allotment of 20 calendars to fans, many of whom had been drinking. If they failed to sell all 20, the cheerleaders had to wander the stands between quarters.
“You walk by a guy and you’re afraid you’re going to get touched,” said Ms. Davis, the former member of the Saintsations fired in January for the Instagram post. “Every girl dreads going out there before the games. We didn’t feel very important because we were literally thrown into the mix with the fans. Who would throw professional cheerleaders, walking around with cash, out with drunk fans?”