On “Problem Areas,” he said, “I’m not going in to try to be right. I’m going in to try to understand. Sometimes, I might be right.”
In a news conference with reporters at HBO’s headquarters in midtown Manhattan and in a subsequent one-on-one interview, Mr. Cenac talked about his vision for “Problem Areas” and why its focus matters so much to him. These are edited excerpts from those conversations.
It’s immediately evident that the aesthetic of “Wyatt Cenac’s Problem Areas” is different from other late-night shows. How did you arrive at it?
At “The Daily Show,” we were satirizing a news program. You put somebody in a suit, you put ‘em behind a desk, and they become an authority figure. What you’ve seen since are other shows in a similar mold. If the idea of my show is to be a little more curious about things, it felt like stepping away from that newsy look would be key. I don’t know if I convey that same sort of gravitas. For me, it was like, lean into what you are, which is a sleep-eyed guy who rambles.
Photo
Why did you want to cover the subject of policing throughout the entire season?
We thought, let’s do something easy. [laughs] We could talk about Trump and the presidency. But a lot of people do that. Policing is one of those things that you see — a man got shot and killed in Crown Heights the other day. These stories keep happening. It felt like we could talk about something that, while it seems intractable, there are ways to make a difference that don’t just involve saying, “We’re going to wait for the midterms!” It would be very easy to just stay in New York and tell these stories, but the problems of New York aren’t necessarily the problems of Ferguson, aren’t necessarily the problems of Miami. To really tell this story, it was good for us to go to all these different places.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Do you feel a personal stake in this topic?
My cousin’s been to jail. My little brother got arrested over parking and traffic tickets, driving through one of those small towns in Texas where they just make revenue. I was arrested when I was 19, for inciting a riot. And you’ll ask, what entailed inciting a riot? It was [uttering a vulgar phrase to a mall cop]. That was it. And I got arrested, thrown in cuffs and everything. And had to get it all expunged from my record. Every time I see a story [about police misconduct], it creates a touchstone to an aspect of my life.
How were you able to secure the participation of the police departments that appear on your show, like in St. Paul, Minn., which is still grappling with the aftermath of the death of Philando Castile?
A lot of law enforcement agencies were skittish. In early conversations, there was a lot of talk of, what are you going to say on the show? We didn’t want to say too much because we were still locking in interviews and we didn’t want them to rabbit on us. But what’s interesting is, everyone was willing to communicate. People do want to be understood. People within the community, lawmakers, law enforcement — they all want to talk. We were able to come in and talk to everybody individually and get them to tell us their story. How they want to see things done and how they want things to be better. We’re not speaking for anybody. We’re just getting people to speak to us, and we get to be this odd mediator of the conversation.