One in 10 Britons admit they are bad with money, according to a study.
Researchers polled 2,000 UK adults and, despite the age of austerity, found many were "blindly" spending without first considering the potential consequences.
Around one fifth of people asked went as far as to describe themselves as "spenders" rather than "savers", the survey found, while one third have never considered cutting back on their outgoings and putting more money into their savings.
Two in five people have never had a savings account (Getty Images)
The research also found 9 per cent prefer to spend their income and enjoy it now rather than build a nest egg.
A spokesman for PiggyBank, which commissioned the research, said: “It’s important to keep track of our outgoings. Splashing out without knowing what funds we have is risky and could lead to financial difficulties.”
It also emerged the typical UK adult has £7,048 in savings and saves £240 of their income on average each month.
Of those who save rather than spend, most – 44 per cent - have done so in case they need the money for an emergency.
Other saving targets include buying a house, a car and home renovations – but 23 per cent are not saving for anything in particular.
However, 62 per cent revealed they end up spending much of what they put aside and 27 per cent admit they have months where they are unable to save.
Four in 10 keep all of their savings in a savings account and 66 per cent said this is their preferred way to put money aside.
In pictures: Savings accounts? They can be scary!
5 show all In pictures: Savings accounts? They can be scary!
1/5 London RateSetter warn the public of the danger of 'zombie' savings accounts by shocking commuters with actors dressed as zombies at Liverpool Street, Bank Station and the Bank of England
2/5 London Britons are in the dark when it comes to their savings accounts, and are at the risk of falling victim to so-called 'zombie' accounts, new research reveals
3/5 London Peer-to-peer lender RateSetter commissioned the independent study, which found that 79% of Britons admit to not checking their savings returns against inflation, whilst over half - 52% - don’t know what return their savings account is currently giving them
4/5 London Shockingly, a terrifying 80% of all savings products in Britain are reported as zombie accounts, so-called because of their lifeless returns and that they are shut to new customers. Their rates can fall as low as 0.1% - earning a pitiful £1 a year on savings of £1,000, highlighting the potentially negative impact that not keeping on top of savings can have
5/5 London As 63% of Brits revealed that they are prioritising sorting out their finances as a New Year’s resolution, RateSetter set zombies loose in the City of London in an effort to both wake people up to the effects of zombie accounts and shock them into saving their savings. The zombies caused quite a stir as they terrorised commuters at financial institutions including the Bank of England and the Royal Exchange, and transport hub Liverpool Street Station
But two in five of those polled had no idea how much interest they earned on their savings over the past 12 months.
And 53 per cent don’t know what the current interest rate on their savings is.
Worryingly, two in five people have never had a savings account and almost one in 10 admit they keep their savings hidden throughout their homes.
SWNS