I can live with British Airways new fare structure, with no hold baggage for “basic” customers. I’ve adapted to Ryanair’s quixotic new bags-on-board policy. I’ve endured every new security measure. And I think I’d actually quite like one of the proposed windowless sleep pods in the aircraft hold (though they’ll be business class only). But what I would rather see is airlines and airports challenging some of the behaviour that can make travelling so miserable.
1 The security queue hell
There have been well over 2bn passengers departing or arriving through British airports in the last decade, according to official statistics. Modern security requirements must be familiar to everyone now. But my entirely unofficial personal survey reveals that when they reach security, 87% of men still ask if they have to remove their trouser belt, while 47% are somehow unaware that iPads can’t be left in their bags.
Meanwhile, French school groups use queue-barging skills acquired at ski lifts in the Alps. And once the grubby grey plastic trays emerge from the X-ray machines, 98.2% of people ahead of me think it’s OK to grab their bag and coat but leave them on the belt for me to remove so I can get to my tray.
2 The Stansted zig-zag
Possibly the worst airport to arrive at late. After security, finding your gate involves plotting a tortuously slow and winding route through WH Smith chocolate aisles, past the perfume pushers, the sunglasses sellers and the union jack-arama of Glorious Britain.
3 The lousy airport wifi
How gracious, in 2018, for Gatwick to offer all of 90 minutes free wifi, after you’ve trawled through their registration. Why the time limit? And why do some smartphone zealots insist on hogging the few charging points at gate lounges?
4 The Ryanair roulette
You and your partner will never be randomly allocated a seat together. Random allocation always means one of you will be placed at the rear, in a middle seat, the other to the front, again in a middle seat. A monkey, hitting keys at random on a typewriter will, eventually, reproduce the complete works of Shakespeare ahead of being randomly allocated a seat next to their partner on a Ryanair flight.
5 The armrest hegemonist
Men, usually, and often the overweight ones, feel entitled to both armrests. These are the same people who also feel entitled to tug at flight attendants’ clothes for attention, leave their headphones on when loudly ordering food, and toss rubbish on the floor. They will also never catch it and bin it when sneezing.
China is trialling a “social credit” system that will impose travel bans for bad behaviour. Maybe we should bring on the airplane asbos here. The good news is that drunken and abusive passengers in the UK could be hit with on-the-spot fines according to reports this week, as the government tries to crack down on the nastiest of travellers.
• Enough of the remorseless tide of whinging about first-world problems (viz above). A month ago I got toothache, and, having moved recently, had not registered with a nearby NHS dentist. Yet finding one was easy. Getting a conveniently timed appointment was simple. The treatment was professional and cheap, though I’m only part way through. A temporary filling fell out at lunchtime this week. Within just 40 minutes, I managed to get to the dentist, had the filling immediately replaced, and was back at my desk. All for no extra fee. It’s easy for some people to bash the NHS at times, particularly dentistry, but at other times you have to be in awe of it.