Over the years suits have shaken off their corporate reputation thanks to a new wave of businesses electing to slacken work dress codes.
Instead, the power suit has been adopted by the fashion crowd as an understated wardrobe staple.
We’re not talking clean-cut boardroom blazers and stuffy shoulder pads here. This time round the conservative two-piece is smart, glamorous, androgynous and – most importantly – comfortable.
It’s not just the silhouette that’s changed either, because for spring/summer 2018 office-friendly hues such as navy, grey and black are being binned in favour of seasonal sugary tones.
Think pastel pink, lavender, pistachio ice-cream green and buttercup yellow.
High-end retailer Net-a-Porter recently reported that searches for “pastel” items have increased threefold since last September, proving that if you want to get ahead in the style stakes, gelato-coloured anything is the way to go.
Like most popular trends this one started on the runway, with everyone from Gucci, Tibi and Michael Kors counterbalancing structured tailoring with saccharine tones.
Cropped Double Breasted Suit, £79, Topshop
For Michael Kors, designing for Topshop, lilac suit trousers are paired with matching jackets and designed with a much looser fit than we’re used to, while Victoria Beckham opts for head-to-toe Parma Violet and two-pieces made from relaxed linen.
Elsewhere Sies Marjan presents a standout tonal pistachio number while Hermes proves delicacy can still be strong with double-breasted jackets in pale yellow.
A piece that every woman should own, the right suit is no easy feat to find, but luckily there are plenty of high quality options on the high street right now.
One of the most chic ways to wear yours is to stick to one colour scheme from head to toe for a tidy and pulled together look.
However, because of their powdery finish you can also get away with mixing up pastel colours. Consider colour blocking yours with mismatched trousers and jackets, or even by slipping a contrasting top underneath a tonal two-piece.