Paul Thomas Anderson fans have no need to fret - the director has stated he won't retire from directing as long as he is able to make films, a sentiment not shared by Quentin Tarantino.
The director - whose credits include Boogie Nights and There Will Be Blood - was asked how long filmmakers can sustain a level of artistic dominance during a discussion of his most recent film Phantom Thread with Bill Simmons back in December when he made the admission.
“Apparently there was a kind of health report that went out to Directors’ Guild of America members, and it said something to the extent that the average life expectancy for a DGA member is 57 years,“ he joked, adding: “It can take a lot out of you. You’ll see other filmmakers that you like whose best work is here or there and in the middle or at the end.”
Anderson referenced Tarantino's plans to retire after making his tenth film (he's currently working on the ninth, the 1969-set Once Upon a Time in Hollywood starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Cruise) - something he struggles to take seriously.
He said: “I know Quentin [Tarantino] likes to say, ‘I’m making 10 movies and then I’m quitting.’ But I could never do that. I don’t know how he could say that or how he could take himself seriously when he says that.
The films you'd expect to have won Best Picture that haven't
15 show all The films you'd expect to have won Best Picture that haven't
1/15 Citizen Kane (1941) Long revered as one of the greatest films ever made, Orson Welles' debut - a film à clef focused on tycoon Charles Foster Kane - was just another nominee back in the day, losing out to How Green Was My Valley .
2/15 Vertigo (1958) Not only did Alfred Hitchcock never win an Oscar (save for his memorial award in 1968), neither did any of his films - one of which is Vertigo , a classic that won Sight & Sound 's once-a-decade greatest films of all time poll in 2012.
3/15 The Graduate (1967) One of the films that kickstarted the New Hollywood Cinema, The Graduate may have won director Mike Nichols an Oscar, but ultimately lost out to Norman Jewison's In the Heat of the night .
4/15 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) The crème de la crème of Hollywood filmmakers would have you believe that Stanley Kubrick's sci-fi classic remains one of the most influential pieces of cinema there is. The Academy didn't agree, however, nominating Kubrick for Best Director and awarding the visual effects in favour of even considering 2001 for Best Picture.
5/15 Taxi Driver (1976) Despite not winning the main award, the Academy showed they had good intentions by nominating Taxi Driver in four categories - that both All the President's Men and Network also lost out to eventual winner Rocky shows that, ultimately, it never really stood a chance.
6/15 Apocalypse Now (1979) Francis Ford Coppola's ambitious Vietnam War epic received a grand total of eight nominations, but only went home with two prizes (for cinematography and sound) losing out to drama Kramer vs. Kramer .
7/15 Raging Bull (1980) Of all the Oscar blows dealt to Martin Scorsese over the decades, none landed harder than Raging Bull 's losing out to Robert Redford's weepie Ordinary People , an oversight many consider one of the Academy's most infamous.
8/15 Blade Runner Another sci-fi classic overlooked by Oscar was the hugely influential Blade Runner which didn't even get nominated in the Best Picture category. That Ridley Scott's latest sci-fi The Martian received seven nominations could signal how the Academy are finally taking responsibility for their past errors.
9/15 Goodfellas (1990) Having awarded both The Godfather parts I and II Best Picture in 1972 and 1974 respectively, you'd think Scorsese's gangster classic stood half a chance; but no - Kevin Costner's directorial debut Dances With Wolves was the most appealing choice for voters. 2012 Getty Images
10/15 Pulp Fiction (1994) New talent on the block Quentin Tarantino's second feature won him the coveted Palme d'Or at Cannes - a success he failed to match back on home turf; while he won an Original Screenplay Oscar, Pulp Fiction got beat by Forrest Gump .
11/15 The Shawshank Redemption (1994) ...and it wasn't the only one. Frank Darabont's adaptation of Stephen King's prison-set novella The Shawshank Redemption also fell victim to Robert Zemeckis' Oscar-friendly Forrest Gump . We don't see that film sitting atop the IMDB top 250 though, do we?
12/15 Fargo (1996) You may think it was remiss of the Academy to shun Fargo but it did come pretty close to winning, its chances bolstered somewhat by seven nominations and two wins (Actress for Frances McDormand and Original Screenplay for the Coen Brothers). It lost out to The English Patient .
13/15 Saving Private Ryan (1998) Having won Best Director five years previous for Schindler's List , everybody expected Steven Spielberg's next war epic to scoop all the top awards. Cue Shakespeare In Love upsetting the establishment.
14/15 The Social Network (2010) David Fincher's generational Facebook drama got shunned in favour of British patriotism in an Oscar two-horse race for the ages that ultimately saw The King's Speech crowned winner.
15/15 Boyhood (2014) For last year's Oscar race, you were either team Birdman or team Boyhood (not forgetting outside bet Whiplash, of course). Each represented a different facet of movie-making that posited them as favourites; that Richard Linklater's labour of love - shot intermittently over 12 years - failed to win may still come as a surprise.
“This is what I want to do as long as I’m able to do it. As long as I’m able to do it, I’m going to do it. I think things can become peculiar when directors don’t act their age maybe or seeing them try to keep up with the kids or trying to be hip. That’s never a good look.”
Follow Independent Culture on Facebook