The documentary presents Presley’s relationship to African-American music as one of affinity and appreciation, not exploitation. “Elvis and Elvis’s music pointed to black culture and said, ‘This is filled with the force of life,’” Mr. Springsteen comments. “If you want to be an American, this is something you need to pay attention to.” The excerpt chosen from “King Creole,” the 1958 Presley film set in New Orleans, shows Presley listening to and then joining African-American street vendors’ cries, acknowledging their influence.
Photo
“He did not invent rock ’n’ roll per se,” Mr. Petty bluntly notes, citing Little Richard and Joe Turner. “What he did was different” — a fusion of all Presley had absorbed. He was not a copyist. The film and boxed set include enough of Presley’s sources to demonstrate how thoroughly he personalized songs like Arthur Crudup’s “That’s All Right” and Bill Monroe’s “Blue Moon of Kentucky”: the two sides, drawn from (black) blues and (white) bluegrass, of his first single for Sun Records. In retrospect, it was a perfect, archetypal mission statement of how he would defy categories.
He wiggled his legs, hips and shoulders, too — onstage and then on television — inciting screams among young women and a moral panic in the older generation. (Musicians in the documentary note that his moves also directed his band.) In a precipitous rise, Presley had the whole country watching and listening. Yet the more popular he got, the more backlash he faced. The condescending Steve Allen had him sing “Hound Dog” to a hound dog, trying (and failing) to humiliate him. Ed Sullivan only showed him from the waist up. It was too late; teenagers were listening.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Then he was drafted and sent overseas, his pompadour clipped. He had signed a management contract with the documentary’s villain: Colonel Tom Parker, who was only an honorary colonel and not an American citizen (he was Dutch), which resulted in Presley never touring internationally. When Presley came back from the army, the Colonel envisioned a conventionally grown-up career for him: pop singing (a TV special with Frank Sinatra), movies, merchandise. The rock revolutionary was supposed to fall into line as an entertainer.
Sadly, he did. There was no other career map at the time, and the Colonel did not encourage artistic exploration. Parker also had a financial interest in Hill and Range Music, the only publisher he allowed to supply Presley with (often mediocre) songs. Through the eventful mid-1960s — the British Invasion, Bob Dylan’s “wild mercury sound,” the Summer of Love — Presley was contractually bound to make movies with lame songs and diminishing returns. One of the documentary’s most bitterly telling finds is an audio interview with a defeated-sounding Presley, where he says that while he’d like to make “artistic” films, “if what you’re doing is doing O.K., you’re better off sticking with it.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Louder Newsletter Every week, stay on top of the latest in pop and jazz with reviews, interviews, podcasts and more from The New York Times music critics. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Somehow, in 1968 he was able to accept a TV offer — performing to a real (studio) audience, singing in the moment — and he grabbed it, for the 1968 special that could have started his rock comeback. His next album, “From Elvis in Memphis,” set aside Hill and Range and included a real hit, “Suspicious Minds.” He had found a contemporary producer. But there was no follow-through.
Instead, there were Las Vegas residencies and arena oldies tours: sequined jump suits, capes, nostalgia. The Vegas shows had gospel singers and a mini-orchestra; he sang “American Trilogy,” merging Civil War anthems of North and South, fusing cultural touchstones. He had his charisma; he had his voice. But he was being presented as an icon of the past. And the uppers and downers were in his blood.
“Anything that he ever had was prescribed,” Priscilla Presley says.
Isolated and eccentric, he set up his final recording sessions at home in Graceland in 1976, cramming musicians into the Jungle Room; a bitter song about infidelity, “Hurt,” became a hit. But the immediate profit was in touring, the grind that wore him out.
The documentary seizes on moments — rehearsals, outtakes — when Presley’s grit and fervor blasted away corniness and shtick. It shows him touching down in gospel music at his bleakest times and, near the end, strains to present him as a spiritual figure. Its finale is from that 1968 TV special: his wrenching performance of “If I Can Dream,” longing for equality and redemption during a year of social turmoil. It shows Presley’s passion and control, his visceral drama, his mastery. But it can’t explain all that he left undone.