Riyad Mahrez’s immediate future is unclear ahead of Leicester’s Premier League home clash with Swansea after he failed to land a deadline day move.
Manchester City were willing to offer £50m plus a player they valued at £15m for the Algeria international.
But the Foxes ultimately asked for £80m cash which the Premier League leaders were not willing to pay.
Transfers: Players that are out of contract in 2018
43 show all Transfers: Players that are out of contract in 2018
1/43 Luke Shaw Following strong criticism from his own manager and pundits, after a series of long-term injuries, the former-Saint looks set to leave Old Trafford after four seasons that has seen him make only 53 appearances for United. Man Utd via Getty Images
2/43 Ander Herrera Manchester United have a one-year option they can invoke in the Spaniard’s contract should they wish to extend his stay at Old Trafford. Nemanja Matic’s arrival has limited the midfielder’s opportunities with the majority of his appearances this season coming from the bench. Man Utd via Getty Images
3/43 Jack Wilshere Having struggled with injuries for years the Arsenal academy graduate has played in Arsenal’s previous four games. Undoubtedly talented, should the midfielder reject a proposed contract extension from the London club he will have plenty of Premier League sides eager to sign him at the end of the season. Arsenal FC via Getty Images
4/43 Emre Can Heavily linked with a move to Juventus, the former-Bayern Munich midfielder has been frustrated by Jurgen Klopp’s rotation policy in a congested Liverpool midfield, and with the impending arrival of Naby Keita from Leipzig in the summer, sees his opportunities further diminishing. Liverpool FC via Getty Images
5/43 Marouane Fellaini Struggling for game time in a United midfield consisting of Paul Pogba, Ander Herrera, and Nemanja Matic, the Belgian may be tempted to move in search of first team opportunities. AFP/Getty Images
6/43 Franck Ribery The Champions League winner, now 34, has struggled with injury this season, and has understandably looked rusty upon his return to the Bayern starting eleven. Bongarts/Getty Images
7/43 Daley Blind Having made only 13 appearances for Mourinho’s side in all competitions this season, the versatile Dutchman has been linked with a move to Barcelona. Getty Images
8/43 Ashley Young Following his conversion to full-back by manager Jose Mourinho, the 32-year-old has scored twice and provided four assists with his dangerous delivery from out wide. Teams in the Premier League will be keen to secure the former Aston Villa player’s experience next term. Man Utd via Getty Images
9/43 Giorgio Chiellini At 33 the Italian centre-back is still a world-class player, and with less than a year on his contract, will surely be a bargain for whoever secures his services next summer. Getty Images
10/43 Zlatan Ibrahimovic Undoubted class, but at 36, whether the Swede represents value for money is another matter, with the striker one of the highest paid players in the Premier League. Getty Images
11/43 Fernando Torres The former Liverpool striker has had to settle for a place on the bench since his return to Atletico Madrid, behind Antoine Griezmann and Kevin Gameiro in the pecking order. A move away surely beckons for the 33-year-old. Getty Images
12/43 Arjen Robben Bayern’s other veteran winger has also had an injury-stricken season in Bavaria, though has still managed to score three and assist four in all competitions. The Dutchman is certainly still a threat when fully fit. Bongarts/Getty Images
13/43 Iker Casillas Having won the Champions League three times, Casillas is certainly a high-quality goalkeeper. Could the Spanish veteran be a good signing for a top-European club? AFP/Getty Images
14/43 Hatem Ben Arfa Talent in abundance though lacking work rate, teams interested in the attacker will hope they can see the player find the form he displayed at OGC Nice, scoring 18 goals and assisting 7 in 2015/16. AFP/Getty Images
15/43 Ezequiel Lavezzi The stocky Argentine forward has been on fire this season in the Chinese Super League, scoring 20 goals and assisting 19 in 27 games. A return to Europe is surely on the cards for the former-Napoli man. AFP/Getty Images
16/43 Joel Robles Displaced from the Everton starting line-up by £30m summer arrival Jordan Pickford, the Spaniard will be eager to guarantee himself more game-time should next year. Getty Images
17/43 Juanfran The Atletico Madrid legend, now 32, is under increasing competition from Croatian full-back Sime Vrsaljko and could be tempted by a move before retirement. Getty Images
18/43 Amin Younes The Ajax forward, currently sidelined with a serious knee injury, had an excellent season in 2016/17 and was rewarded with his first Germany cap by Joachim Lowe in June this year. AFP/Getty Images
19/43 Andre-Pierre Gignac The French target-man has enjoyed the most prolific spell of his career with Mexican side Tigres UANL, scoring a goal in every two games in all competitions. Proven in Ligue 1 with Marseille, the striker is capable of succeeding in Europe. AFP/Getty Images
20/43 Yohan Cabaye Capable of dictating games at the top-level, the Frenchman could surely be a wildcard for a top side in the Premier League next season. Getty Images
21/43 Mario Balotelli The enigmatic Italian striker has reignited his stop-start career in Nice with 33 goals in 49 appearances for the French side. AFP/Getty Images
22/43 Joao Moutinho Winner of Ligue 1 with AS Monaco last year, the 31-year-old midfielder is into the final year of his contract. AFP/Getty Images
23/43 Carlos Vela The Mexican wideman has found goals hard to come by this season, scoring just once this season for Real Sociedad. AFP/Getty Images
24/43 Yaya Toure After years of speculation that Toure would leave Manchester City, the Ivorian’s time at City finally seems to coming to an end. Getty Images
25/43 Stefan de Vrij Liverpool have been linked to the Netherland’s international in recent weeks as Jurgen Klopp seeks to add quality to his defence. Getty Images
26/43 Neven Subotic The Bundesliga winner has made only four appearances this season, often failing to even make the bench for Dortmund. Getty Images
27/43 Max Meyer The 22-year-old playmaker Meyer has been consistently linked with Liverpool, Tottenham and Barcelona and has so far refused any contract offers made by Schalke. Bongarts/Getty Images
28/43 Dani Garcia The Spanish midfielder has been a mainstay for SD Eibar over the past three seasons. Offering a goal-threat from midfield with his long-distance shooting and set-piece ability, Garcia could prove a shrewd acquisition. Getty Images
29/43 Achraf Hakimi The Moroccan full back has deputised well for Dani Carvajal in La Liga this season, and has shown glimpses of his potential at the Bernabeu. AFP/Getty Images
30/43 Stephan Lichsteiner Disappointing performances for the Bianconeri this season, and added competition from Mattia de Sciglio have led to rumours that the Swiss defender could be set to leave Turin in January. Getty Images
31/43 Bernard The pacey winger has enjoyed a four year spell in Ukraine with Shakhtar Donetsk, though in not signing a new contract, may have his heart set on playing in one of Europe’s top five leagues. AFP/Getty Images
32/43 Diego Reyes The 25-year-old defender has guided FC Porto to the top of the Primeira Liga, conceding only six goals in the process. AFP/Getty Images
33/43 Enes Unal Still only 20, the Turkish forward has seen his career stall since moving to Spain from Manchester City. Should the striker fail to sign a new contract with Villareal, a move back to the Eredivisie could prove fruitful for a striker with vast potential. Getty Images
34/43 Ivan Marcano The Porto centre-back, also capable of playing left-back, has been the subject of interest from Everton following a number of impressive displays for the Iberian club. AFP/Getty Images
35/43 Joao Miranda Former Atletico Madrid star Miranda has started all but one league game for Inter Milan this term helping his side keep eight clean sheets so far. Should he fail to renew his contract with the Nerazzuri, he will be a top acquisition for any side. Getty Images
36/43 Kepa Arrizabalaga The 23-year-old goalkeeper is yet to sign a new deal with Athletic Bilbao, and is rumoured to be close to agreeing a move to Real Madrid for €20m. Getty Images
37/43 Kwadwo Asamoah The five-time Serie A winner is capable of playing in a variety of positions and would certainly be a valuable squad player for top sides in Europe. AFP/Getty Images
38/43 Mark Uth The 26-year-old striker has been in excellent form for Hoffenheim this season, scoring 12 goals in all competitions. Bongarts/Getty Images
39/43 Pedro Leon Injured since the summer, the experienced right winger would be a gamble with such little game time in the past year. If he can prove his fitness, the winger is capable of creating chances from wide areas, with six assists last season in La Liga. AFP/Getty Images
40/43 Santi Cazorla Blighted by serious injuries to his Achilles and having had surgery nine times in 14 months, the diminutive midfielder will hope to regain his fitness to restart his career. Arsenal FC via Getty Images
41/43 Zlatko Junuzovic The Werder Bremen creative midfielder has assisted 49 in 182 appearances, scoring 20 goals in the process. Bongarts/Getty Images
42/43 Rafinha The experienced Brazilian right-back is entering the last year of his contract with Bayern Munich. Capable of deputising at the top level, and with invaluable experience in the Champions league, the 32-year old could provide excellent cover for an elite European side next season. Bongarts/Getty Images
43/43 Sergio Canales The Spanish playmaker is yet to agree a new contract and has proven, when fit, that he is capable of playing at the top level. AFP/Getty Images
The Independent understands the winger missed training on Tuesday to try to force the switch and faces a battle to reintegrate himself at Leicester.
Some players are understood to be unhappy with how Mahrez has conducted himself and it is uncertain when he will play for the 2016 Premier League champions again.
A ‘friend’ of Mahrez told Sky Sports on Wednesday the 26-year-old felt down and upset at his treatment by the club.
January transfer window 2018 shuts: Ten of the top moves
He missed Wednesday’s 2-1 defeat at Everton with boss Claude Puel hopeful of welcoming Mahrez back into the fold, but remained cautious.
“All the players, all the staff, will help him to come back with a smile, to enjoy his football with his team-mates because he is a great player, fantastic, a good man and he likes football,” he said after the game.
“Of course, for the moment, I did not speak with Riyad, but perhaps there is a lot of disappointment.
“We will see when we can manage all this for the future.”
Riyad Mahrez handed in a transfer request at Leicester on Tuesday (Getty)
Cliff Ginnetta, chairman of the Leicester City Supporters’ Club, is confident Puel can restore calm and get the best out of Mahrez once again.
Ginnetta, who praised the club for sticking to its guns, said: “It must be very hard for him. People are saying that he’s said things and he’s probably not said any of those things and it’s people putting two and two together and getting five.
“It’s a very difficult situation for him and maybe it needs the manager to get his arm around him and people who know him the best to have a word with him and sit him down and sort things out with him.
“But they are a very tight-knit squad, so I don’t think getting him back into the squad will be very difficult.”
Mahrez has not turned up for tra(Getty)
Mahrez asked to leave the Foxes last summer and his stance has not changed, although neither has the club’s.
They do not want to lose him but should Mahrez, who signed a new four-year contract in 2016, leave it will be on their terms.
Leicester will hold out for what they believe is his market value with Philippe Coutinho moving to Barcelona from Liverpool for £142m and Virgil van Dyke going to Anfield for £75m in January.
Mahrez recently moved agents and is now with Coutinho’s representative Kia Joorabchian.
He won the PFA Player of the Year and scored 18 goals when the Foxes clinched a shock Premier League title two seasons ago.
PA
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.