Washington (CNN) The US immigration courts are set up to give the attorney general substantial power to almost single-handedly direct how immigration law is interpreted in this country -- and Jeff Sessions is embracing that authority.
Sessions quietly moved this week to adjust the way asylum cases are decided in the immigration courts, an effort that has the potential to test the limits of the attorney general's power to dictate whether immigrants are allowed to enter and stay in the US and, immigration advocates fear, could make it much harder for would-be asylees to make their cases to stay here.
Sessions used a lesser-known authority this week to refer to himself two decisions from the Board of Immigration Appeals, the appellate level of the immigration courts. Both deal with asylum claims -- the right of immigrants who are at the border or in the US to stay based on fear of persecution back home.
In one case, Sessions reached into the Board of Immigration Appeals archives and overturned a ruling from 2014 -- a precedent-setting decision that all asylum cases are entitled to a hearing before their claims can be rejected. In the other, Sessions is asking for briefs on an unpublished opinion as to how much the threat of being the victim of a crime can qualify for asylum. The latter has groups puzzled and concerned, as the underlying case remains confidential, per the Justice Department, and thus the potential implications are harder to discern. Experts suspect the interest has to do with whether fear of gang violence -- a major issue in Central America -- can support asylum claims.
A Justice official would say only on the latter case that the department is considering the issue due to a "lack of clarity" in the court system on the subject. On the former, spokesman Devin O'Malley said the Board of Immigration Appeals' 2014 holding "added unnecessary cases to the dockets of immigration judges who are working hard to reduce an already large immigration court backlog."
Read More