Q I’m originally from Denmark, but moved here five years ago to do my degree. I’ve now finished studying and have started my first full-time job in London. As I’m only in my early twenties it’ll probably be some years before I’ll need a mortgage but I would like to plan ahead.
I’m in the lucky position that I already have a savings of the equivalent of £21,000 invested in a handful of stocks and shares through my Danish kroner savings account.
I have considered moving the allowed £4,000 a year into a lifetime Isa so I can get the benefit if I end up buying a property in the UK. I do not have any actual plans of returning to Denmark in the near future, but it is impossible to say in the long term.
Investment ISAs: Act now or lose your £20,000 allowance Read more
As far as I can see, the pros for investing in a stocks and shares lifetime Isa are that it will be cheap because the current exchange rate is in favour of the Danish kroner and there is the obvious benefit of purchasing a property in the UK.
The cons are that if I decide not to buy in the UK, I’ll face a harsh penalty for withdrawing the money.
What is your suggestion? Is it better to keep my cash in a normal savings account or should I move to a lifetime Isa or a help-to-buy Isa?
Also, out of interest, would it be a good idea to get a credit card in order to have a good credit score even if it means just leaving it in a drawer? And does my credit record in Denmark affect my ability to take out a mortgage in the UK? MA
A The biggest pro for investing in a stocks and shares lifetime Isa is the 25% government bonus which, if you pay in the maximum £4,000 you’re allowed to contribute, means an extra £1,000 on top of your savings. The biggest downside is that if you withdraw your savings before the age of 60 (and you don’t have a terminal illness), you pay a 25% penalty. So if you paid in the maximum and got the bonus but then changed your mind about having a lifetime Isa, you would have to pay a penalty of £1,250 (ie 25% of £5,000). By contrast, there is no penalty with a help-to-buy Isa but that’s because the government bonus isn’t paid until you use your Isa savings to complete on the purchase of a property. So early withdrawal of your savings just means that you don’t get the bonus.
What's the best way to save for a deposit for a flat? Read more
Both the lifetime Isa and the help-to-buy Isa can be used to build up a cash deposit to put towards the purchase of a property, with a maximum price of £450,000 with both types of Isa if you are buying in London, but a maximum of £250,000 with a help-to-buy Isa used to buy somewhere outside the capital. The lifetime Isa is also more generous in terms of what you can pay in as the most you can pay into a help-to-buy Isa is £3,600 in the first year, then £200 a month (£2,400 a year) after that. The lifetime Isa is the only option if you want to invest in stocks and shares, which over a five-year period should produce a better return than interest paid on cash savings in a help-to-buy Isa.
As to where you should put the money, it’s tempting to say that if there is any risk that you would want to withdraw money for anything other than property purchase, you should steer clear of a lifetime ISA despite its bonus. If you want to invest in stocks and shares rather than cash, a help-to-buy Isa isn’t an option but you could take out a standard stocks and shares Isa where you can currently save up to £20,000 a year. An alternative would be to split your money between a stocks and shares Isa and a help-to-buy Isa to take advantage of the potential penalty-free bonus.
Concerning your credit score: yes it would make sense to take out and use a credit card to build up a history of using credit responsibly so making sure that you always pay off more than the minimum payment each month and always paying on time. And no, your credit record in Denmark is of no interest to lenders in the UK, so it won’t affect your ability to get a mortgage here. What can work against you when applying for a mortgage is not being registered to vote which, as an EU citizen you are allowed to do in local government and Greater London Authority elections.