Built from their experience of managing billions in foreign exchange each year, HiFX has created a simple online international payments service.
HiFX Online provides you with the quickest and easiest way to convert £50 to £300,000 online at the touch of a button, wherever you have access to the internet. As HiFX are online, there's no having to telephone your broker or stand in line at the foreign exchange counter of your local bank.
HiFX also beats the banks on price, as well as service. Every month, HiFX checks all the main high street bank and building society exchange rates to make sure that its overall price (including banking charges, exchange rates and other fees) is better.
See how much you could save with HiFX: sign up and make a transfer
Whatever your international money transfer needs, let the experts at HiFX provide you with all the help and guidance you need to get the best rates possible when moving your money to and from the UK. It’s easy to sign up, free, can be done 24 hours a day online and you get all of these great benefits;
The ability to move money, pay people or bills in seconds.
Faster transfers ensuring your money arrives on time, every time, when you need it.
Online account management available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Get quotes, make transfers and track payments wherever you have access to the Internet.
Norton security used by 97 or the worlds top 100 banks giving you complete peace of mind.
A brand you can trust. HiFX is authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority under the Payment Services Directive 2009, registration number 462444.
Access to over 800 currency pairs and a range of currency options including the ability to fix the exchange rate for up to 12 months into the future so you can protect yourself from adverse currency moves.
Consistent bank-beating exchange rates saving you money on each and every transaction.
Make sure you don't miss out when the markets are in your favour with HiFX's new personalised currency tools. Designed to keep you one step ahead, MyHiFX enables you to set personalised rate alerts, access live customer rates, monitor your key currencies and make international payments – all in a few clicks.
So for example, if you'd like to know when the Euro next hits €1.25 or the US dollar hits $1.65 simply tell us and we'll automatically alert you by email when your target rate is reached.