Russia, he said, repeating a claim the Kremlin has asserted throughout the Skripal affair, eliminated all of its stockpiles of chemical weapons in 2017, and as for Novichok, “We did not produce it and didn’t store it.”
Mr. Skripal remains hospitalized nearly five weeks after he was poisoned, but his daughter has recovered and was moved to a secure location this week.
Mr. Sedwill’s letter also said that Britain has evidence that Russian security services have been monitoring the Skripal family. Cyberspecialists from Russia’s Foreign Intelligence Services hacked Ms. Skripal’s email in 2013, the letter said. Asked about that at his news conference, Mr. Yakovenko responded sarcastically, “Big surprise.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
The letter added that Russian intelligence services “view at least some of its defectors as legitimate targets for assassination.”
“We therefore continue to judge that only Russia has the technical means, operational experience and motive for the attack on the Skripals, and that it is highly likely that the Russian state was responsible,” the letter said. “There is no plausible alternative explanation.”
The letter comes as British officials try to consolidate European support for united actions against Russia. The central element of Britain’s case against Russia is the unusual nerve agent used in the attack, which was developed in Soviet laboratories during the last years of the Soviet Union.
Last week, the chief executive of the Defense Science and Technology Laboratory in Porton Down, Britain’s premier chemical weapons laboratory, said its scientists could not identify “the precise source” of the chemical, though its purity indicated that it was almost certainly created by a “state actor.”
Mr. Sedwill’s letter lays out further British intelligence on Russia’s chemical weapons programs, reporting that the Novichok agents, a strain referred to in Russia as Foliant, were developed at the State Institute for Organic Chemistry and Technology at Shikhany, a small town on the Volga River, in southern Russia. It said that Russia continued to produce the agents after the breakup of the Soviet Union, but did not declare the work to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
It goes on to say that “during the 2000s,” Russia created a special unit to develop chemical weapons for use as tools in state-sponsored attacks and to “train personnel from special units in the use of these weapons.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
“This program subsequently included investigation of ways of delivering nerve agents, including by application to door handles,” it said. “Within the last decade, Russia has produced and stockpiled small quantities of Novichoks under the same program.”