Chineke! were exactly the right band to baptise the renovated Queen Elizabeth Hall, which first opened in 1967 with a concert conducted by Benjamin Britten. Supporting the new, giving a platform to hundreds of world premieres, or to ensembles setting out, was always the QEH’s trademark. It still is.
This medium-sized venue on London’s south bank, also housing the small Purcell Room, occupies a trapezoid space between the Royal Festival Hall and Waterloo Bridge. None of its lines are straight. Its foyer, now emptier, better lit and with new windows on to the Thames, still wraps awkwardly and uncosily around the auditorium. The 900-seat space, with its warm, vivid acoustic sounding livelier than ever, has been cleaned, mended, cherished and upgraded, especially backstage. Cleverly it is at once the same and better. You don’t need to be a connoisseur of concrete to love this place.
Queen Elizabeth Hall/Purcell Room refurbishment: glowing with renewed lustre Read more
Countless older, more established ensembles could have been chosen for the occasion. How much would it have meant to them? The QEH awaits their brilliance any time. Chineke!’s shoots are green, their sap rising. With their gloriously enthusiastic following, they attract an audience as diverse as anyone living in a UK conurbation meets in the street or park, but never in a standard classical concert.
Europe’s only majority-BME orchestra took their first collective steps (like the London Sinfonietta half a century ago) in the QEH, making their memorable debut just before the hall’s closure in 2015. To return now for this high-profile reopening was more than symbolic: it confirmed that these musicians belong to the building’s restored future as well as to its recent scuffed past.
They launched last Monday’s concert with their signature piece, the exuberant Ballade written by Samuel Coleridge-Taylor (1875-1912), born just up the road in Holborn. A new work by Daniel Kidane (b1986), featuring the baritone Roderick Williams, set Martin Luther King’s “I have a dream” speech. Full of bristling orchestral detail, Dream Song was over too soon to realise its potential, but added to the celebratory mood.
The Chineke! choir, attractive-sounding but underused in the Kidane, had a chance to sing out in Britten’s The Building of the House, performed at that 1967 original opening. Beethoven’s Fourth Symphony, fast, exposed, yet secure in the experienced hands of conductor Anthony Parnther, was as dangerous as it was exhilarating.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Anthony Parnther conducting Chineke! at the Queen Elizabeth Hall. Photograph: Mark Allan
Still a part-time enterprise, Chineke! sound fresh, impassioned, a little untamed, full of raw promise. Their fine woodwind and brass, in blend and finesse, are as yet ahead of the strings: a standard pattern in any recently established orchestra. (Many older groups haven’t sorted that problem yet.) Working out how to drill individually skilful players into an integrated team is a slow and dedicated business.
The strings’ wide embrace includes a violinist still at school (you may recognise the surname, Kanneh-Mason, one of two current family members), and a dextrous veteran who has played in the LPO for 32 years (Thomas Eisner). The leader, Tai Murray, a model of physical relaxation and tireless muscular energy – even her feet dance as she plays – sets a mesmerising example for all violinists seated behind her. That zest and command is echoed in the double basses by another formidably experienced player, Chi-chi Nwanoku, who founded Chineke! Work in progress of the best kind.
Next night the hall celebrated a work whose very essence is continuity and change: Steve Reich’s Different Trains, for live string quartet and two pre-recorded quartets, premiered at the QEH in 1988. Rhythms, dynamics, sampled language and train sounds criss-cross and fragment, frenetically, poetically. London Contemporary Orchestra Soloists played intrepidly, to a backdrop of Bill Morrison’s 2016 train film. Lugubrious and atmospheric, it enhanced the experiential impact, but you hear the music better without it. Bryce Dessner was the soloist in Reich’s canon-rich Electric Counterpoint (1987). Dessner’s own punchy Aheym and Mica Levi’s lyrical You Belong to Me completed the programme.
Not to be outshone, the London Philharmonic Orchestra’s latest Stravinsky concert on Wednesday had its own dazzle. Kristin Scott Thomas, husky and assured, narrated the French spoken text (by André Gide) in Perséphone (1934), with tenor Toby Spence as eloquent soloist. This “choral ballet” in three acts is sufficiently full-on without the intended dancer, especially when as beautifully performed as this. Praise to Trinity Boys Choir, who had to wait in saintly stillness before their short contribution. Shaking off low blood-sugar yawns, they sang terrifically. It’s fascinating. I think once is enough.
Thomas Adès conducted, opening this stimulating programme with the UK premiere of his Powder Her Face Suite, sparkling, louche and witty. (Check it out on iPlayer). This, and Gerald Barry’s antic Organ Concerto (London premiere), were the highlights. Thomas Trotter, game soloist, seems to have more arms, not to mention feet, than a Hindu goddess. The concerto is one of the most rationally crazy pieces I’ve heard since the last work by Barry. Think of Tristram Shandy in orchestral dress. Which other composer seriously makes you laugh?
Star ratings (out of 5)
Chineke! ★★★★
Steve Reich’s Different Trains ★★★★
LPO: Perséphone ★★★★