The eighth season of The Walking Dead has drawn to a close in earth-shattering fashion as All Out War - an arc which has shaped the show for the past two years - comes to an end.
Rick has battled Negan (Jeffrey Dean Morgan) for two agonising seasons after he mercilessly bludgeoned both Abraham and Glenn to death in the traumatic season 7 premiere.
*Spoilers follow*
Negan is alive and well in the comic books, even earning Rick's trust years on from events depicted in the TV series. As we just witnessed in the season 8 finale, the leader of his fallen faction The Saviours finds himself locked away as Rick's prisoner following the culmination of All Out War. He remains there for an unknown number of years, living proof that the Alexandrians were always in better stead to rebuild the world in a way that doesn't involve constant blood-spill.
Later, Negan becomes a crucial part of the battle with an even more dangerous faction than The Saviours ever were, named The Whisperers (who may or may not have been teased in the season 8 finale).
*Huge comic book spoilers follow*
The former leader of The Saviours is the one who eventually murders their leader, the fearsome Alpha, in a bid to earn Rick's trust. In fact, Negan is so eager to assimilate into the new world that, in a recent issue of the comic book series, he saves his former adversary's life during a particularly close brush with a horde of walkers.
The most shocking Walking Dead moments
10 show all The most shocking Walking Dead moments
1/10 Sophie's a walker (season 2, episode 7) Much of season two's opening half is spent looking for Sophia, the missing daughter of Carol (Melissa McBride). Turns out she was locked up in Hershel's barn as a zombie all along.
2/10 Shane reanimates without being bitten (season 2, episode 12) When Carl (Chandler Riggs) guns down a deranged Shane (Jon Bernthal) to protect his father, the shock arrives when he manifests into a walker despite not being bitten; turns out everyone's infected with the virus and will turn whichever way they die.
3/10 Axel's bullet to the eye (season 3, episode 10) A character introduced in the show's prison arc, Axel is a reformed prisoner who strikes up a friendship with Carol - until he's gunned down mid-sentence.
4/10 Carl kills Lori after she gives birth (season 3, episode 4) Lori (Sarah Wayne Callies) goes into labour at the very moment a zombie siege breaks out at the prison. Unfortunately, she doesn't make it through the procedure with her son Carl being the one to put a bullet to her head.
5/10 The Governor slays Hershel (season 4, episode 8) The Governor makes his dramatic return for a showdown at the prison after he captures Michonne (Danai Gurira) and Hershel (Scott Wilson). Rick reaches out, attempting to reason with him - but The Governor starts a war when he proceeds to decapitate poor old Hershel instead.
6/10 "Look at the flowers" (season 4, episode 14) In a standout episode from the show's fourth season, Carol is forced to take drastic measures when young teenager Lizzie murders her sister Mika in the belief that she'll live on as a zombie. Realising Lizzie's depraved mind would endanger those around her, Carol puts a gun to the young girl's head and, telling her to "look at the flowers," pulls the trigger, fighting back the tears.
7/10 Carl's bullet to the eye (season 6, episode 9) Season six returned from its mid-season break in typically dramatic fashion when an iconic moment from the graphic novels came to life: Carl takes a bullet to the eye.
8/10 Beth is killed (season 5, episode 8) Upon being kidnapped, Beth (Emily Kinney) is taken to Grady Memorial Hospital managed by Atlanta Law Enforcement. Forced to reside there against her will, the group - including Rick and Daryl (Norman Reedus) - eventually find her - only for her to be accidentally shot in the head by her captor. The worst thing? Her sister Maggie (Lauren Cohan) had just arrived outside.
9/10 Negan kills Abraham Season seven opened in brutal form as we discovered it was Abraham (Michael Cudlitz) at the opposite end of Negan's baseball bat. "Suck my nuts," the soldier growls as the Saviours' leader brings Lucille raining down on his head until nothing remains but a pulpy mess.
10/10 Negan kills Glenn Negan decides to punish the group once more after getting clocked round the face by Daryl. Without expectation, he thwacks Lucille round the head of poor Glenn. With his eyeball popping out of his head, he manages: "I'll find you, Maggie before Negan proceeds to finish the job ending the former pizza delivery boy's life.
“Holy shit, Rick," he exclaims, "Can you believe it? We're working together!” If these events are depicted in the series at a later stage, it will prove once and for all that Carl's parting wisdom was correct.
The Walking Dead season 8 finale airs tomorrow evening on FOX and will be available to stream on NOW TV. It will return to AMC for season 9 later this year.
Are you a longtime fan of Lost? Or looking for a new series to start? Subscribe to two of our writers' new podcast 'The LOST Boys' following their journey watching from the very beginning - one for the first time, the other for the eighth
Follow Independent Culture on Facebook