• Wednesday, vs. San Antonio
The Pelicans’ final game of the season is far more interesting, one of two must-watch games in the West on Wednesday. New Orleans has beaten the Spurs twice this season, but lost the most recent game last month when Anthony Davis fouled out after 36 minutes of play. The Spurs defend Davis relatively well, and are a more disciplined team than New Orleans. But the Pelicans are younger and Davis is a superstar. It’s going to be close.
Prediction: Pelicans go 2-0, finish at 48-34 and clinch the 5th seed.
Photo
San Antonio Spurs
• Monday, vs. Sacramento
What a snooze! Sacramento is a bad team, and Gregg Popovich is a good coach. The Kings haven’t beaten the Spurs this season. They also didn’t beat them last season. Or the season before that.
• Wednesday, at New Orleans
Beginning in February, the Spurs lost 11 of 14 games, causing them to drop through the standings so fast that they left a Manu-shaped hole behind them. But San Antonio has righted the ship with the help of LaMarcus Aldridge, who has averaged 29 points (six more than usual) in the team’s last 13 games, during which the Spurs have gone 9-4.
Aldridge has struggled against the Pelicans. In their first contest this season, he had only 16 points and four rebounds. In the second, he twisted his ankle early and had to leave the game. He played better in their game last month, but he has trouble against Davis (and, before he got injured, DeMarcus Cousins). He will have to do a better job Wednesday or these Spurs (a team constructed from glue, Popsicle sticks and Tony Parker’s gossip magazine clippings) will be in trouble.
Prediction: Spurs go 1-1, finish the season at 47-35, fall to seventh.
Photo
Oklahoma City Thunder
• Monday, at Miami
The Rockets, who average more points per game than anyone in the league, save the Warriors, are surprisingly bad at scoring in the fourth quarter, often because they have already won their games by then. But the Thunder’s defense on Saturday was still a minor revelation. Russell Westbrook, who is sometimes derided for his defense, did particularly heroic work covering James Harden.
Miami is not an easy team to beat at home. The Heat, who have secured a playoff spot but are still jockeying for position within the Eastern Conference, are 25-14 in Miami. They played the Thunder close in Oklahoma City last month, before eventually capitulating, 105-99. In fact, many of the Thunder’s most impressive wins (including two against the Warriors) have come, not when they have outgunned an opponent but when they have held other teams to fewer points than usual. They should commit themselves to defense anew on Monday.
• Wednesday, vs. Memphis
If you have not followed the Thunder all season, you’ve missed a disappointing run for a team that includes the reigning M.V.P. in Westbrook, and the All-Stars Paul George and Carmelo Anthony. The three veterans have trouble playing as a unit on offense, and their styles often clash. Melo, in particular, has been especially bad recently. But the Grizzlies have been doing their best to be the worst team in the league throughout the latter part of the season. They will not provide much of a contest.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Prediction: Thunder go 2-0, with a narrow win in Miami. Finish the season at 48-34, clinch the sixth seed. (The Pelicans own the tiebreaker over the Thunder because they won two of the teams’ three matchups this season.)
Photo
Minnesota Timberwolves
• Monday, vs. Memphis
Jimmy Butler hurt his knee in late February and some fans were ready to call it for the T-Wolves’ season. Minnesota has mostly struggled since but has occasionally held its own against tough opponents, including the Warriors and Washington Wizards early last month. But the team has since gone 6-5, with some embarrassing losses, including one to the Grizzlies. Butler returned Friday, looking remarkably solid after his long hiatus. He scored 18 points in just 23 minutes of play against the Lakers. With a game against Denver on Wednesday, the Timberwolves cannot afford to let Memphis beat them again.
• Wednesday, vs. Denver
Timberwolves forward Taj Gibson described Butler as the “one piece” who helps the team fit together after Friday’s victory over the Lakers.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
It’s true. Butler is an all-star and veteran on a team full of young players who narrowly lost to Denver last week. Butler could put the Timberwolves over the top against the Nuggets, who they beat in Denver earlier this season. But the Nuggets have won five straight; if they are fighting for a playoff berth in the last game of the season, they will not be easy to beat.
And if Denver is no longer in contention by then, that would mean the Timberwolves are in. The Nuggets are bound to want to give the team that took their spot a loss to end the regular season.
Prediction: Timberwolves go 2-0, finish the season at 47-35, clinch the eighth seed.
Photo
Denver Nuggets
• Monday, vs. Portland
The Nuggets’ travel schedule has been among the most difficult in the league, according to ESPN’s Baxter Holmes. In their second-to-last game they play the Blazers at home. Portland is a strong team, but it has struggled mightily on this road trip, losing every game in a Texas three-step last week before getting a day of rest on Sunday. The Blazers are only a game up on the Jazz, so they have something to lose in their last two games. But Denver has beaten them two out of three times this season (including a blowout in December when Damian Lillard was injured). On Monday, with their season on the line, the Nuggets are likely to make it three of four.
• Wednesday, at Minnesota
And then they have to hop on a plane and fly to Minnesota. After winning six straight, the Nuggets will be fired up but exhausted. The T-Wolves beat them twice this season, lost to them last week and have Butler back now. This will, in all likelihood, be the game that decides each team’s season, and it’s a tossup. But at full strength, the Timberwolves are a better team than the Nuggets, and they are well coached. They’ll win a thriller at home.
Prediction: Nuggets go 1-1, lose their final game of the season and, in a small tragedy, miss the playoffs. They finish 46-36.