(Reuters) - To mark Valentine’s Day, Reuters photographers documented the stories of over 20 couples from around the globe.
Haidar Ali Moracho, 20, and Coral Ibanez Blanco, 23, pose for a picture at the Moor's Field garden (Campo del Moro) in Madrid, Spain, February 7, 2018. Haidar, a transgender young man who's in his second year of Asian and African Studies at Madrid's Autonoma University and Coral, currently looking for a job, have been dating for seven years. "A friend of mine told me there was a girl who liked Dragon Ball's Vegeta character and wanted to become a boy. She put us in touch virtually and we spent the following year video calling each other before we were able to meet in person in Madrid," said Coral. REUTERS/Susana Vera
Their stories run the gamut from storybook high school romances to the more unconventional, such as finding love after an acid attack. For the photo essay, click here: reut.rs/2EE7J3n
They include Nhuchhe Bahadur Amatya, 76, a retired accountant at the Nepal Electricity Authority and his wife Raywoti Devi Amatya, 74, a housewife. Nhuchhe was 17 and Raywoti 15 when they wed in an arranged marriage 59 years ago.
Nhuchhe Bahadur Amatya, 76, a retired accountant at Nepal Electricity Authority along with his wife Raywoti Devi Amatya, 74, a housewife, pose for a picture as they sit inside their shop in Lalitpur, Nepal, February 4, 2018. REUTERS/Navesh Chitrakar
“I saw Raywoti for the first time at my home after we officially got married, during the wedding her face was covered with a Ghumto (veil),” said Nchuchhe.
For Haidar Ali Moracho, 20, a transgender man from Spain, his relationship with girlfriend Coral Ibanez began online and had to be kept secret from their families for five years.
Slideshow (19 Images)
“It was very hard. There were times I thought it would be less painful if we broke up, but I couldn’t. Together until death do us part,” he said.
When Indian acid attack victim Pramodini Roul suddenly regained her sight, years after she was attacked, the first thing she saw was her partner, Saroj.
“I was flying with Saroj and suddenly started seeing things clearly. That was the first time I saw Saroj’s face. I had never imagined that I would be able to see Saroj in my lifetime,” she said.
True love’s path ran smoother for 37-year-old New Yorker Chad Ostrum. On his first day at college, he glanced through a door and a girl unpacking boxes caught his eye, so he went back to get a better look at the woman who would become his wife and the mother of their daughter.
“Through three states, long-distance dating, high times, low moments and 19 years later, we now share a home, a little girl and a life.”