Concussions Changed the Game
Tagliabue and Goodell have both been criticized for not taking strong enough action against concussions. Perhaps the most significant difference in the league today is the awareness of the issue. In 2005, it was still common to hear announcers laughingly enthusing over a player “getting his bell rung” from a big hit.
Photo
Intense media scrutiny, including a series of articles in The New York Times, brought new attention to the seriousness of the issue, and the league has responded. In 2009, it implemented a concussion protocol; in 2016 it reached an agreement with the N.F.L. Players Association to fine teams that violate it. The N.F.L. continues to adjust the protocol, which requires players with potential concussions to be removed from the game and examined by an unaffiliated doctor. If a concussion is diagnosed, the player cannot return to the game.
In addition, the league is much more actively punishing hits to the head. Players can be immediately ejected if a hit is especially egregious. Still, there are those who feel the power is not used enough. Ferocious head hits by Danny Trevathan of the Bears on Davante Adams of the Packers and Kiko Alonso of the Dolphins on Joe Flacco of the Ravens this season did not bring ejections.
The Rise of the Evil Empire
Going into the 2005 game, the Patriots had won two of three Super Bowls and were building a dynasty, but they were not necessarily more hated than any other successful team. Then came Spygate and Deflategate. There were two more Super Bowl wins in 2015 and 2017, and a rising perception that New England was getting an undue amount of calls, most recently against the Jaguars in the A.F.C. championship.
The Patriots have become the team that many fans love to hate.
Go Ahead and Celebrate
An old joke is that “N.F.L.” stood for “No Fun League.” Stiff rules limiting celebrations prevented spontaneity and made for a somewhat joyless experience, many fans felt.
But this season, some of those rules were loosened, leading to the possibility of more colorful expressions of jubilation. Among the newly legal celebrations were “using the football as a prop” after a touchdown, “celebrating on the ground” and “group demonstrations.” But those deemed “offensive,” “prolonged” or “directed at an opponent” could still be penalized.
Players did their best to take advantage of the more permissive environment. The Vikings played duck-duck-goose, the Eagles mimed baseball, and JuJu Smith-Schuster locked his bicycle.
The stage is set for some Super Bowl celebrations that 2005-era players could only have imagined (or been fined for).
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
A Smaller, Sleeker Look
The hulking pads that once engulfed players are mostly gone.