Thousands of activists will take to the streets on Saturday as part of a national day of action to demonstrate public support for a vote on the final Brexit deal.
Several pro-EU organisations have joined forces to mount an attack on the government’s Brexit plans with more than 350 events across the country, ahead of the launch of a £1m campaign demanding the opportunity to stay in the EU if the people want to.
Remain-backing groups have been emboldened by a recent shift in public support towards staying in the EU, and a number of high-profile figures have come out in favour of a second referendum, including former prime ministers John Major and Tony Blair.
A recent poll for the anti-Brexit group Best for Britain found that 44 per cent of people want a vote on the exit terms secured by Theresa May, while 36 per cent were against the idea of a further referendum. However, other polls offer mixed messages on the public’s views on reversing Brexit.
MPs have been promised a “meaningful vote” on the final deal after inflicted a humiliating parliamentary defeat on the government.
But Ms May and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn have both ruled out the prospect of allowing a public vote on the terms.
As well as flagship events in 12 cities, ranging from Weston-super-Mare to Edinburgh, there will also be thousands of supporters setting up stalls and leafleting in both Remain and Leave areas.
Cross-party MPs including Tory Anna Soubry and Labour’s Chuka Umunna are expected to speak at the launch of the People’s Vote on Sunday, led by the pro-EU campaign group Open Britain and the European Movement, which is chaired by former Conservative health secretary Stephen Dorrell.
James McGrory, executive director of Open Britain, said: “Our largest ever national day of action is all about bringing together the various pro-European groups so that we can speak with one, unified voice, because we know that together we are stronger.”
It comes as MPs prepare to return to parliament after recess next week, where Ms May faces a number of challenges securing the safe passage of her key Brexit bill through the House of Lords.
Labour’s leader in the upper chamber warned the prime minister the EU Withdrawal Bill will face a “rocky road” unless ministers bring forward acceptable amendments to the legislation.
Brexit talks: Top issues facing UK on leaving EU
7 show all Brexit talks: Top issues facing UK on leaving EU
1/7 Customs union A key point in the negotiations remains Britain's access to, or withdrawal from, the EU customs union. Since the referendum there has been hot debate over the meaning of Brexit: would it entail a full withdrawal from the existing agreement, known as hard Brexit, or the soft version in which we would remain part of a common customs area for most goods, as Turkey does? No 10 has so far insisted that “Brexit means Brexit” and that Britain will be leaving the customs union, but may be inclined to change its position once the potential risks to the UK’s economic outlook become clearer. Alamy
2/7 Northern Ireland-Irish border Though progress was made last year, there has still been no solid agreement on whether there should be a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. To ensure borderless travel on the island, the countries must be in regulatory alignment and therefore adhere to the same rules as the customs union. In December, the Conservative Party’s coalition partners, the DUP, refused a draft agreement that would place the UK/EU border in the Irish Sea due to its potential to undermine the union. May has promised that would not be the case and has suggested that a “specific solution” would need to be found. Getty
3/7 Transition period Despite protests from a small number of Conservative MPs, the Government and the EU are largely in agreement that a transitional period is needed after Brexit. The talks, however, have reached an impasse. Though May has agreed that the UK will continue to contribute to the EU budget until 2021, the PM wants to be able to select which laws made during this time the UK will have to adhere to. Chief negotiator Michel Barnier (seen here with EU Minister David Davis) has said the UK must adopt all of the laws passed during the transition, without any input from British ministers or MEPs. Rex
4/7 Rights of EU citizens living the UK The Prime Minister has promised EU citizens already living in the UK the right to live and work here after Brexit, but the rights of those who arrive after Brexit day remains unclear. May insists that those who arrive during the transition period should not be allowed to stay, whereas the EU believe the cut-off point should be later. Getty
5/7 Future trade agreement (with the EU) Despite this being a key issue in negotiations, the Government has yet to lay out exactly what it wants from a trade deal with the EU. Infighting within the Cabinet has prevented a solid position from being reached, with some MPs content that "no deal is better than a bad deal" while others rally behind single market access. The EU has already confirmed that access to the single market would be impossible without the UK remaining in the customs union. Getty Images
6/7 Future trade agreements (internationally) The Government has already begun trying to woo foreign leaders into prospective trade agreements, with various high profile state visits to China, India and Canada for May, and the now infamous invitation to US President Donald Trump to visit London. However the UK cannot make trade agreements with another country while it is still a member of the EU, and the potential loss of trade with the world's major powers is a source of anxiety for the PM. The EU has said the UK cannot secure trade deals during the transition period. EPA
7/7 Financial services Banks in the UK will be hit hard regardless of the Brexit outcome. The EU has refused to give British banks passporting rights to trade within the EU, dashing hopes of a special City deal. However according to new reports Germany has suggested allowing trade on the condition that the UK continues paying into the EU budget even after the transition period. Getty
Angela Smith, writing exclusively in The Independent, said the government could face defeat on the bill at the hands of a coalition of Labour, Tory and other peers, potentially delaying the vital legislation by sending it back to the House of Commons.