Tony Finau has revealed the full extent of the dislocated ankle that he suffered just one day before The Masters, with the American golfer successfully battling against the injury to finish a miraculous tied-10th at the weekend.
The 28-year-old masters rookie stole the headlines for all the wrong reasons last Wednesday when, having scored a hole-in-one during the Par-Three competition at Augusta National Golf Club, he celebrated by running backwards down the fairway and slipped, dislocating his left ankle in the process.
Finau managed to pop the joint back into place and managed to finish his round before seeking treatment, and despite the sickening injury, he was in place to tee-off for The Masters on Thursday morning.
The Masters 2018 - in pictures
31 show all The Masters 2018 - in pictures
1/31 Day One The Masters got underway on Thursday at Augusta National Getty
2/31 Day One Jordan Spieth moved into an early lead at Augusta Getty Images
3/31 Day One Sergio Garcia endured a torrid return to Augusta carding the equal-worst score ever seen with 13 on one hole. Rex Features
4/31 Day One Tiger Woods bogeyed the fourth and fifth after finding sand off the tee in a slow start. Getty
5/31 Day One Rory McIlroy celebrates after taking a share of the lead at The Masters but he soon dropped down the order. Getty
6/31 Day One Jordan Spieth held the overnight lead at The Masters after day one. Getty
7/31 Day Two But Spieth made a sputtering start to the second day. Getty
8/31 Day Two Patrick Reed took the lead on day two with an excellent six-under-par round. Getty
9/31 Day Two Woods received a huge ovation at each hole despite his struggles. Getty
10/31 Day Three Phil Mickelson got into trouble on the first where an 'air shot' lead to a double-bogey Getty
11/31 Day Three Woods admitted he left himself too much to do on the greens. Getty
12/31 Day Three Woods shakes hands with playing partner Ian Poulter Getty
13/31 Day Three Rickie Fowler celebrates an early birdie on day three at The Masters Getty
14/31 Day Three Rory McIlroy punches the air after an eagle at the eight hole on day three at The Masters Getty
15/31 Day Three Patrick Reed lead at the halfway stage of the third round at the Masters Getty
16/31 Day Three Tommy Fleetwood shot a six-under 66 on Saturday to put himself into contention. Getty
17/31 Day Three Rory McIlroy of Northern Ireland locates his ball in the flowers on the 13th hole Getty
18/31 Day Three Patrick Reed leads The Masters heading into the final round Getty
19/31 Day Four Rafa Cabrera Bello tees off on the second surrounded by waves of fans eager to see partner Tiger Rahm Getty
20/31 Day Four Webb Simpson became the fourth player in Masters history to hit back-to-back eagles Getty
21/31 Day Four Bernhard Langer in action on his final round alongside Fred Couples Getty
22/31 Day Four Tiger Woods made an inconsistent start to his final round Getty
23/31 Day Four Patrick Reed started the final round off with a three-shot lead. Getty
24/31 Day Four McIlroy struggled to keep pace in the final round Getty Images
25/31 Day Four Spieth embarked on one of the great final round in Masters history but it wasn't enough to beat Reed. Getty Images
26/31 Day Four Jordan Spieth paid the price for his mistakes earlier in the Masters. Getty
27/31 Day Four McIlroy failed to capitlise on his chances and finished tied-fifth. Getty
28/31 Rickie Fowler delivered a strong final round to push Reed to the final hole. Getty
29/31 Day Four Patrick Reed celebrates clinching the Masters Getty Images
30/31 Day Four Patrick Reed celebrates his major-winning putt Getty Images
31/31 Day Four Patrick Reed celebrates becoming the new Masters champion with the Green Jacket. Getty
Finau dismissed fears he would not be able to compete by ending the first day in second place, and although his challenge faded over the course of the weekend, he reeled off a brilliant run of six straight birdies on the back nine on Sunday to move into the top 10 and guarantee himself a place at next year’s Masters.
The result was enough to move him up to 32nd in the world rankings, two places higher than where he started the weekend, and he posted two images on Instagram to reveal the heavy bruising and swelling that he had to cope with throughout his four rounds.
Tony Finau revealed the heavy bruising and swelling that he suffered at The Masters (Instagram/ tonyfinaugolf )
Finau dislocated his ankle on the Wednesday before The Masters began (Instagram/ tonyfinaugolf )
He added: “What a week. Top 10 in my @TheMasters debut! It was an eventful week!
“Hole in One, Failed Celebration, Adversity, 2 rounds in the 60s, 2019 Masters invite, I believe we find out most about who we are through adversity.
“What a memorable week for me and my team! Proud of my team being up to the challenge to help me compete at a high level this week. Thanks to all who reached out with well wishes, until next year Augusta National!”
Finau was also quick to thank Game Ready and Stamina Pro Active Recovery Patches for helping him to recover in time to compete at The Masters.
Lining up his shot down the narrow seventh hole, Finau’s ball trickled back from pitching to the right of the green and miraculously found the hole to spark wild celebrations from the Augusta patrons – including from his children who joined him for the round.
Finau scored the hole-in-one on the seventh hole (Getty)
But as he ran backwards, Finau's left ankle buckled underneath him (Getty)
Finau realised he had dislocated his left ankle and popped it back in place (Getty)
But as he sprinted down the fairway and ran backwards to soak up the adulation of the cheering fans, his left ankle buckled beneath him and he fell to the floor, having dislocated the joint.
Even more gruesomely, the 28-year-old then appeared to pop his ankle back into the joint and carried on to complete his round.
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.