The ‘Beast from the East’ and Storm Emma have reaped havoc on Britain’s sport fixtures this week, with the disruption set to continue well into the weekend as football, rugby union and rugby league alter their plans to cope with the widespread snowstorm across the United Kingdom.
Tonight’s lone Premier League fixture – a repeat of the EFL Cup final between Arsenal and Manchester City – due to take place at the Emirates Stadium in north London looks set to go ahead as planned despite the capital being hit by constant snowfall for the last 24 hours.
However, with conditions improving in London and the absence of any more heavy snow on Thursday, Arsenal are confident the game will go ahead as planned – but have urged supporters of both teams planning to travel to the game keep up-to-date with the latest travel information.
However, outside of the Premier League, football has not been so lucky. Wednesday’s entire Scottish football programme was postponed, meaning the Premiership games between Celtic and Dundee, Hibernian and Hamilton Academical, and Motherwell and Aberdeen, were all abandoned and will be rescheduled at a later date.
This week’s Super League schedule has also been heavily impacted, while rugby union is also poised for a number of postponements - although the Aviva Premiership looks set to go ahead as planned for the bulk of matches.
Here’s a full run-down of sport affected in Britain this week.
UK weather: Amazing timelapse video shows snow falling across London
Thursday
Football
Premier League
Arsenal vs Manchester City – Will go ahead but fans advised to check Transport for London and Greater Anglia for travel updates.
Rugby League
Super League
Hull KR vs Castleford Tigers – postponed
Arsenal have urged fans to keep an eye on the latest travel information (Getty)
Friday
Football
Championship
Middlesbrough vs Leeds United – due to go ahead with a “clean-up” operation in effect since Wednesday. A final announcement will be made on Friday.
Scottish Championship
Dundee United vs St Mirren – postponed
Rugby Union
Premiership
Harlequins vs Bath – “highly unlikely” to be cancelled, with a final decision being made on Friday.
Harlequins are confident of their match against Bath going ahead on Friday night (Getty)
Pro14
Cardiff Blues vs Benetton – postponed
Edinburgh vs Munster – postponed
Ulster vs Glasgow – postponed
Rugby League
Super League
Hull vs Warrington – due to go ahead as planned and will now be shown on Sky Sports.
Leeds Rhinos vs Catalans Dragons – postponed
Wakefield trinity vs Huddersfield Giants – postponed
St Helens vs Salford Red Devils – postponed
Wigan Warriors vs Widnes Vikings – confirmed on at 20:00
Leeds Rhinos vs Catalans Dragons has been postponed (Getty)
Saturday
Football
Premier League
All games due to go ahead
Championship
Ipswich Town vs Hull City - postponed
Sheffield United vs Burton Albion - postponed
All other games due to go ahead
Scottish Premiership
Ross County vs Partick Thistle – postponed
St Johnstone vs Hamilton Academical – postponed
League One
Blackpool vs Northampton Town - postponed
Bradford City vs Portsmouth - postponed
Gillingham vs Rotherham United – postponed
Shrewsbury Town vs Peterborough United - postponed
All other games face late inspections
League Two
Barnet vs Port Vale - postponed
Cheltenham Town vs Notts County - postponed
Exeter City vs Chesterfield - postponed
Newport County vs Accrington Stanley - postponed
Swindon Town vs Yeovil Town - postponed
All other games face late inspections
Premiership games are likely to go ahead but the Pro14 games have already been called off (Getty)
Rugby Union
Premiership
Exeter Chiefs vs Saracens – delayed by 24 hours, kick-off 15:00 on Sunday
Gloucester vs Newcastle Falcons – likely to go ahead
Northampton Saints vs Sale Sharks – likely to go ahead
Pro14
Scarlets vs Leinster – postponed
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.