The US has launched a scathing attack on Russia’s role in propping up the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad with the country’s ambassador to the United Nations saying Washington “will respond” to a suspected chemical attack in Syria, regardless of whether the UN acts or not.
As Russia claimed first there was no evidence of a chemical attack in the Damascus suburb of Douma and then said the US had helped anti-Syria militants “stage” the incident which killed potentially dozens, the UN ambassador Nikki Haley, said the US was ready to act alone if necessary.
“We have reached the moment when the world must see justice done,” Ms Haley told an emergency session of the UN Security Council. “History will record this as the moment when the Security Council either discharged its duty or demonstrated its utter and complete failure to protect the people of Syria. Either way, the United States will respond.”
This is a very serious situation on the ground in Syria.
If the Security Council is not careful, the use of #chemicalweapons will be seen as routine fighting in war and that’s very dangerous for everybody on the Council including the Russians.#UNSC — Karen Pierce (@KarenPierceUN) April 9, 2018
Her words came after president Donald Trump said that “nothing is off the table” when asked ahead of a cabinet meeting whether US military action was a possibility and that a decision would be swift.
He also took aim at Russia, Syria’s closest ally: “We cannot allow atrocities like that. Cannot allow it,” Mr Trump said. “If it’s Russia, if it’s Syria, if it’s Iran, if it’s all of them together, we’ll figure it out and we’ll know the answers quite soon.”
Pressed on Russia’s role in the suspected chemical weapons attack, Mr Trump said Russian president Vladimir Putin “may” bear responsibility.
“He may. And if he does, it’s gonna be very tough. Very tough,” Mr Trump said of the US response. “Everybody’s gonna pay a price. He will and everybody will.”
Russian UN Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia told the Security Council that the US would face “grave repercussions” if it carries out an attack against Syrian government forces over the suspected chemical attack.
Almost precisely a year ago, Ms Haley appeared before the council and held up photographs of victims of a confirmed chemical weapons attack, allegedly carried out by the Syrian government, in the town of Khan Sheikhoun. This time, she said, she saw little value in producing photographic evidence as it would have no impact.
“Who does this? Only a monster does this. Only a monster targets civilians, and then ensures that there are no ambulances to transfer the wounded,” she said. “What’s the point of trying to shame such people …Pictures of dead children mean nothing to countries like Russia.”
Ms Haley spoke hours after a Syrian military airfield, known as T4, located close to the city of Homs, was struck in an attack that reportedly killed up to 14 people. The US and France both denied carrying out the strike. Many reports state the surgical strike was carried out by Israel, although the country has refused to comment.
Critics of the US and UK have accused them of double standards in the Middle East, having sold weapons to Saudi Arabia, who are involved in a bombing campaign in Yemen, while condemning Russia for its support of Mr Assad as part of a civil war that has been raging since 2011.
Mr Trump said the US would “probably by the end of today”, on how the US will respond to the alleged chemical attack. He said: “We are studying that situation extremely closely. We are meeting with our military and everybody else and we’ll be making some major decisions over the next 24 to 48 hours.”
A year ago, in what was one of his first actions as Commander-in-Chief, Mr Trump responded to the deaths at Khan Sheikhoun by ordering the firing of 59 cruise missiles at Syrian targets.
Mr Trump was to meet with senior national security aides late in the evening to discuss options, with Monday being the first day on the job for his new national security adviser, John Bolton, who has previously advocated military action against Syria.
Donald Trump: ‘nothing is off the table’ for US response to alleged Syria chemical attack
For its part, Russia warned the US of “grave repercussions” if it carried out attack against Syrian government forces.
“There was no chemical weapons attack,” Mr Nebenzia said on Monday.
“Through the relevant channels we already conveyed to the US that armed forces under mendacious pretext against Syria, where, at the request of the legitimate government of a country, Russian troops have been deployed – could lead to grave repercussions.”
Mr Nebenzia also said investigators with the global chemical weapons watchdog, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) should fly to Syria as early as Tuesday to look into accusations about the attack, offering them protection from Syrian authorities and Russian troops.
World news in pictures
50 show all World news in pictures
1/50 15 April 2018 Fireworks are set off as the final performance takes place during the Closing Ceremony for the 2018 Commonwealth Games. PA
2/50 14 April 2018 The wreckage of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre compound in the Barzeh district, north of Damascus, after the United States, UK and France launched strikes against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime early on April 14 in response to an alleged chemical weapons attack after mulling military action for nearly a week. Syrian state news agency SANA reported several missiles hit a research centre in Barzeh, north of Damascus, "destroying a building that included scientific labs and a training centre" AFP/Getty Images
3/50 13 April 2018 Indian activists gather to show support for the chairperson of the Delhi Commission for Women Swati Maliwal, who is on a hunger strike against the alleged rapes in Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, in New Delhi, India. According to news reports Maliwal is sitting on hunger strike demanding that authorities take strict actions against the alleged rapists. EPA
4/50 12 April 2018 Shi'ite pilgrims carry a symbolic casket outside Imam Moussa al-Kadhim's shrine to mark the anniversary of his death in Baghdad, Iraq Reuters
5/50 11 April 2018 Seasonal winds washed tons of debris ashore at Matahari Terbit beach, near Sanur, Bali, Indonesia. Reuters
6/50 10 April 2018 Syrian onlookers gather around rescue teams clearing the rubble at the site of an explosion of unknown origin which wrecked a multi-storey building the previous night in the war-battered country's northwestern city of Idlib. The cause of the explosion in the jihadist-held city, which killed more than a ten people and wounded 80, according to the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights monitoring group, was not immediately clear. AFP/Getty
7/50 9 April 2018 Protesters try to block French gendarmes during an evacuation operation in the zoned ZAD (Deferred Development Zone) in Notre-Dame-des-Landes, near Nantes, France. Reuters
8/50 8 April 2018 Competitors cross the start line at the annual Pyongyang Marathon. AFP/Getty
9/50 7 April 2018 The body of journalist Yasser Murtaja, 31, is carried during his funeral in Gaza city. He was shot by Israeli troops while reporting on Palestinian protests on the Gaza-Israel border. Reuters
10/50 6 April 2018 Supporters of the former South African president Jacob Zuma rally prior to his appearance in the KwaZulu-Natal High Court on corruption charges in Durban. Zuma, 75, arrived to face corruption charges linked to a multi-billion dollar 1990s arms deal. The graft case against him was postponed until June 8 after a brief 15-minute hearing. AFP/Getty
11/50 5 April 2018 Palestinian protesters run during clashes with Israeli troops at Israel-Gaza border. Reuters
12/50 4 April 2018 Presidents Hassan Rouhani of Iran, Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Vladimir Putin of Russia pose before their meeting in Ankara. Reuters
13/50 3 April 2018 South African school children pause next to a portrait of the late South African anti-apartheid campaigner Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, wife of African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela, at her house in Soweto. South African President Cyril Ramaphosa paid tribute to Winnie, who died on April 2, saying that Nelson Mandela's former wife was a "voice of defiance" against white-minority rule. AFP/Getty
14/50 2 April 2018 Jewish priests and civilians take part in the Cohanim prayer during the Passover holiday at the Western Wall in the Old City of Jerusalem. AFP/Getty
15/50 1 April 2018 Pope Francis greets the crowd at St Peter's square after the Easter Sunday Mass in the Vatican. Christians around the world are marking the Holy Week, commemorating the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, leading up to his resurrection on Easter. AFP/Getty
16/50 31 March 2018 Mourners hold back a relative of Palestinian Hamdan Abu Amshah, who was killed along the Israel border with Gaza, during his funeral in Beit Hanoun town. Reuters
17/50 30 March 2018 Israeli soldiers shot tear gas grenades towards the Palestinian tent city protest commemorating Land Day. The day marks the killing of six Arab Israelis during 1976 demonstrations against Israeli confiscations of Arab land. AFP/Getty
18/50 29 March 2018 An emotional Steve Smith is comforted by his father Peter as he fronts the media at Sydney International Airport. Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft were flown back to Australia following investigations into alleged ball tampering in South Africa. Getty
19/50 28 March 2018 French gendarmes escort the coffin of the late Lieutenant Colonel Arnaud Beltrame transported by car during a funeral procession leaving the Pantheon as part of a national tribute in Paris. The French President will lead a national commemoration to hostage-swap policeman Arnaud Beltrame killed in jihadist attack. AFP/Getty
20/50 27 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin visits a memorial made for the victims of a fire in a multi-story shopping center in the Siberian city of Kemerovo. Officials say that the fire escapes were blocked and a PA system was turned off during the fire that killed over 50 people. Kremlin Pool Photo via AP
21/50 26 March 2018 At least 64 shoppers have been killed in fire at a shopping centre in Russia. A further 16 people were still missing after flames broke out at the four-storey Winter Cherry mall in the city of Kemerovo in Siberia, according to Russian Emergencies Minister Vladimir Puchkov. The fire was extinguished in the morning after burning through the night. Parts of the building were still smouldering and the floors of the cinema hall had caved in in places, another emergency official said. Russian Emergencies Ministry via Reuters
22/50 25 March 2018 Syrian civilians gathering for their evacuation from the town of Arbin in the Eastern Ghouta region on the outskirts of the capital Damascus, following a deal with the regime. The deal is expected to see some 7,000 people bussed from Arbin and Zamalka towns and the district of Jobar to a rebel-dominated part of northern Syria. AFP/Getty
23/50 24 March 2018 Students attend the ‘March For Our Lives’ in Washington. In the wake of the Florida attack, there has been a widespread effort to ban assault rifle. Getty
24/50 23 March 2018 Police at the scene of a hostage situation in a supermarket in Trebes. An armed man took hostages in a supermarket in southern France, killing three and injuring about a dozen others, police said. A French minister confirmed the gunman had been shot dead by police. Reuters
25/50 22 March 2018 A boy rows his boat in the polluted waters of the Brahmaputra river on World Water Day in Guwahati, India. Reuters
26/50 21 March 2018 Kosovo's opposition lawmakers release a teargas canister inside the country's parliament in before a vote for an agreement to ratify or not a border demarcation deal signed in 2015 with Montenegro. AFP/Getty
27/50 20 March 2018 People carrying luggage leave the Russian Embassy in London and board a van bearing diplomatic plates. Dozens of people including adults with children arrived at the Russian embassy in the morning and then left carrying luggage in vehicles bearing diplomatic registration plates. Britain last week announced the expulsion of 23 Russian diplomats over the spy poisoning row, prompting a tit-for-tat response from Moscow. AFP/Getty
28/50 19 March 2018 The Soyuz MS-08 spacecraft is mounted on the launch pad at the Russian-leased Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan AFP/Getty
29/50 18 March 2018 President Vladimir Putin walks out of a voting booth at a polling station during Russia's presidential election in Moscow. AFP/Getty
30/50 17 March 2018 People take part in a pensioners protest to demand decent pensions in Barcelona. Thousands of people across the country took part in mass demonstrations called by main Spanish workers unions demanding rises of state pensions in accordance with the consumer price index AFP/Getty
31/50 16 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin visits the Almazov National Medical Research Centre in Saint Petersburg. AFP/Getty
32/50 15 March 2018 Vladimir Putin chairs a meeting with members of the Security Council in Moscow. Reuters
33/50 14 March 2018 German Chancellor Angela Merkel is sworn in by the President of the German lower house during the government's swearing-in ceremony at the Bundestag in Berlin. Merkel, head of the Christian Democratic Party CDU, starts her fourth term as German chancellor, capping months of political uncertainty as she bartered with her rivals of the SPD to help govern Europe's top economy in a "grand coalition". AFP/Getty
34/50 13 March 2018 Nepali students of University of Dhaka light candles in memory of the victims of the US-Bangla aircraft crash in Nepal, Bangladesh. Reuters
35/50 12 March 2018 Rescuers work to save passengers from a plane crash at Kathmandu airport in Nepal. AP
36/50 11 March 2018 French President Emmanuel Macron and his wife Brigitte Macron pose for photographs as they visit the Taj Mahal. AFP/Getty
37/50 10 March 2018 France’s far-right party Front National (FN) president Marine Le Pen applauds former US President advisor Steve Bannon after his speech during the Front National party annual congress, in Lille, northern France. AFP/Getty
38/50 9 March 2018 A television screen showing pictures of US President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un at a railway station in Seoul. AFP
39/50 8 March 2018 Protesters form triangles with their hands during a demonstration for women’s rights in Bilbao, Spain. Reuters
40/50 7 March 2018 A labourer works on a salt pan in the outskirts of the Nagaur district in the Indian state of Rajasthan ahead of International Women’s day. AFP/Getty
41/50 6 March 2018 Sri Lanka's army soldiers and police personnel stand near a vandalised building in Digana, a suburb of Kandy. Extremists Buddhist mobs swept through the town on Monday, burning at least 11 Muslim owned shops and homes. Sri Lanka's president declared a state of emergency Tuesday amid fears that anti-Muslim attacks in the central hill town could spread. AP
42/50 5 March 2018 Chinese President Xi Jinping arrives for the opening of the first session of the 13th National People's Congress (NPC) at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. The NPC has over 3,000 delegates and is the world's largest parliament or legislative assembly though its function is largely as a formal seal of approval for the policies fixed by the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party. The NPC runs alongside the annual plenary meetings of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), together known as 'Lianghui' or 'Two Meetings'. EPA
43/50 4 March 2018 Female protestor stands up with the words 'Berlusconi Sei Scaduto' written on her body, translating as 'Berlusconi, you’ve expired', as Silvio Berlusconi stands during voting of the political and regional elections in Milan, Italy. Rex
44/50 3 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin delivers a speech during a rally to support his bid in the upcoming presidential election at Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow. Reuters
45/50 2 March 2018 A light turns red outside of Germany's Krupp Mannesmann steel factory. German officials and industry groups warned U.S. President Donald Trump that he risks sparking a trade war with his closest allies if he goes ahead with plans to impose steep tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. AP
46/50 1 March 2018 People dance during Holi festival celebrations in Kathmandu, Nepal. EPA
47/50 28 February 2018 Indian fans watch as the funeral procession of the late Bollywood actress Sridevi Kapoor passes through Mumbai. AFP/Getty
48/50 27 February 2018 Candles are left in tribute to murdered Slovakian investigative reporter Jan Kuciak, 27, and his fiancee Martina, 27, at Slovak National Uprising Square in Bratislava. A leading Slovak newspaper says organised crime may have been involved in the shooting death that shocked Slovakia. The bodies of Kuciak and Kusnirova were found Sunday evening in their house in the town of Velka Maca, east of the capital. AP
49/50 26 February 2018 Colosseum during a heavy snowfall in Rome, Italy. REUTERS/Alberto Lingria
50/50 25 February 2018 Family members of victims of the sunken South Korean naval ship Cheonan by a North Korean attack hold up defaced portraits of Kim Yong Chol, vice chairman of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party Central Committee, during a rally against his visit near the Unification bridge in Paju, South Korea. A North Korean high-level delegation led by Kim arrived to attend the closing ceremony of the Pyeongchang Winter Olympics. The signs read: " Let's punish Kim Young Chol." Getty
“The Syrian authorities and Russian troops will provide conditions to travel to the areas of the alleged incident for them to familiarise themselves with the situation,” he said. Separately, the OPCW said it opened an investigation to determine what exactly had happened in Douma.
US Defence Secretary Jim Mattis, in separate remarks at the Pentagon, also suggested Moscow bore some blame. He criticised Russia for what he suggested was its failure to ensure the elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons arsenal under terms of a 2013 agreement.
Earlier, the British Prime Minister Theresa May said Russia must be “held to account” alongside Syria if Mr Assad’s government was found to be responsible for the attack.
At a press conference during a visit to Denmark, she said: “If they are found to be responsible, the regime and its backers, including Russia, must be held to account.”
Ms May said the attack in Douma was part of a “troubling wider pattern of acts of aggression” and abuse of international convention over chemical weapons and that Russia’s repeated use of its veto at the UN has enabled international rules on chemical weapons attacks to be broken and investigations hampered. “This must stop,” she said.
Mr Nebenzia had raised the issue of the poisoning of the Skripals in Salisbury at the UN to try and claim that those in the West were engaging in misinformation. Earlier, Ms May also spoke about the poisoning – which the UK has blamed on Moscow – saying that Russia had shown “similar recklessness last month with the use of chemical weapons”.
Asked if the UK would join any US-led military action in Syria, Ms May said: “What we are currently doing is working urgently with our allies to assess what has happened here.
“This has been an absolutely barbaric attack that has taken place,” she added.
Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the allegations of the chemical attack in Douma were false and a “provocation”. Mr Lavrov also said the strike on a Syrian air base in Homs in the wake of the suspected chemical attack was a “dangerous development”, and he blamed Israel for the strike by unidentified war planes.