Ben Foster has pledged his future to West Bromwich Albion, regardless of their near-certain drop into the Championship. The 34-year-old goalkeeper says he intends to stay at The Hawthorns and expects many of his team-mates to follow suit.
A number of Albion players, including captain Jonny Evans, have buyout clauses in their contracts that will be activated once the club’s seemingly inevitable relegation from the Premier League is confirmed. However, Foster believes he and several of the club’s longer-serving players will remain to help West Brom rebuild from their dismal campaign.
“I’ll be here,” said Foster. “I’ve got no interest in trying to move clubs. I’m very settled and I’m sure there are quite a few others who would love to stay and help us get back to the Premier League. If the worst comes to the worst and we end up in the Championship next season we’ve got to bounce back up, it’s as simple as that.
“I’d like to keep a core of the players that really want to dig in and work hard and be in a tough fight to get out of the Championship, because it is a tough fight.”
Albion conceded a 75th-minute equaliser to Swansea’s Tammy Abraham on Saturday with a 1-1 draw ending their eight-game losing streak in the league but extending their winless run to 10 games. They have now dropped 26 points from winning positions this season, leaving the club bottom of the table and 10 points adrift of the safety line with five games remaining.
“That’s what gets you relegated,” said Foster. “They’re the games you need to win. You win them, you stay up, you don’t win them, you get dragged into a relegation fight. Premier League football is so brutal at times.
“The main thing is we’ve lost points from winning positions where in previous years we didn’t, especially under Tony Pulis – if we went 1-0 up we would win 1-0. It’s as simple as that and we just haven’t done it this season. I don’t know how we’ve got away from that because that’s how we’ve been really good at holding onto a lead and stifling teams.”
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.