The things we look for in an airline are usually comfort, good service, and good value – but a recent travel ranking also put the attractiveness of the crew at the top of the list.
Monocle's Travel Top 50 – an annual list selected by the magazine's editors – awarded Portugal's TAP (Transportes Aéreos Portugueses) airline the accolade of “most handsome crew.”
Founded in 1945, TAP – which has its hub in Lisbon — is Portugal's national airline, and it flies to numerous European and international destinations.
TAP is Portugal's national airline and was founded in 1945 ( Steve Parsons/PA Archive/PA Images)
It's the only airline to connect London City Airport and Lisbon.
According to Monocle, the airline employs more than 2,800 people across its routes.
A post shared by TAP Air Portugal (@tapairportugal) on Jul 21, 2016 at 1:24pm PDT
But there's more to the airline than its attractive crew. Here's what it's really like to take a trip on TAP.
A post shared by TAP Air Portugal (@tapairportugal) on Dec 2, 2015 at 4:27am PST
There are six different fare levels – Discount, Basic, Classic, Plus, Executive, or Top Executive. Among other things, those in Plus and above get priority check-in and fast-track boarding.
Prices are competitive – fares for a flight from London to Toronto (via Lisbon) start at £173, and to New York it's £207 one-way. Flights directly to Lisbon are about £42.
The Discount fare is for hand luggage only, but Basic and above include at least one 23-kilogram checked bag (50.6 pounds), with two bags for Executive and above.
A post shared by TᕼE ᗩᗰᗩᘔIᑎG ᒪIᖴE Oᖴ ᑕᕼᗩᖇᒪIE (@charliebrown.bulldog) on Jul 26, 2017 at 5:11am PDT
If you fly Executive or Top Executive, you'll get free access to an exclusive lounge. At Lisbon's Humberto Delgado Airport, the 850-square-metre facility features rest zones, showers, a business centre, a restaurant and bar, and a children's area.
The Top Executive fare, which is fully refundable, also includes valet/car parking.
Here's a look inside the lounge.
A post shared by Rotten Ralph (Udonaut) (@rotten_ralphs) on Sep 25, 2017 at 6:10am PDT
The food-and-drink offering looks pretty appealing.
TAP's A330 aircraft – used for long-haul flights – have been refurbished, and the airline is modernising its short-haul A319s, A320s, and A321s as well. There will be new Portuguese-designed seats in all classes, and a new class (Plus) between economy and executive with more legroom and “better reclining.”
By March, the A320s will have the new seats with green shades for economy and red for economy Plus.
A post shared by TAP Air Portugal (@tapairportugal) on Mar 3, 2017 at 12:05pm PST
The in-flight entertainment system on long-haul flights offers award-winning movies, TV programmes, and box sets, games, and documentaries.
Passengers also have access to a selection of newspapers, TAP's in-flight Up Magazine, music, and, on some A330 and A340 aircraft, 12 TAP radio stations.
Economy and Executive passengers will also find support for tablets, with power and USB sockets that will enable them to enjoy their favourite entertainment.
Here's what the new Executive class – with new reclining lie-flat bed seats, USB sockets, noise-cancelling headphones, and private storage – looks like on the A330.
Executive passengers will enjoy their in-flight entertainment on bigger, more modern HD screens.
In-flight meals are included in all classes, even on a Discount fare. The menu focuses on Portuguese products and traditional desserts.
A post shared by Polina (@polina_amadee) on Aug 19, 2017 at 9:36am PDT
Depending on the length of the flight, economy meals can include hot or cold dishes or sandwiches.
In business class, chefs prepare dishes including a breakfast of bread, cold cuts, cheese, fruit, and yogurt. Lunch, dinner, and supper are a choice of meat, fish, or pasta — traditional Portuguese fare.
Executive passengers can even preorder meals on some flights.
This passenger said: “I would like to thank TAP airlines for the lovely meal during my flight to Portugal...Salmon Soufflé, Chicken Salad, Cheesecake and Wine from the Douro Valley...it was delicious and much needed!”
A post shared by Tea (@citeachic) on Aug 19, 2017 at 8:48pm PDT
There are even vegan and veggie options.
And, of course, there's a wine list.
To top it all off, the crew does sound pretty great.
The week in travel: in pictures
+ show all The week in travel: in pictures
1/10 Ali Campbell and ex UB40 members in Antigua Virgin Atlantic
2/10 Ali Campbell and ex UB40 members perform in Antigua. They were there to film a new music video encouraging tourists to return to the caribbean post hurricane. Virgin Atlantic
3/10 The World's steepest funicular rail line is opening in Switzerland REUTERS
4/10 A skier in front of mount Grosser Mythen and the barrel-shaped carriages of a new funicular line during sunny winter weather on a piste in Stoos, Switzerland REUTERS
5/10 President Donald Trump gets a tour of the newly-opened Mississippi Civil Rights Museum AP
6/10 "This Little Light of Mine," gallery, a soaring space in the heart of the Mississippi Civil Rights Museum AP
7/10 Snow caused havoc with transport throughout Europe. Here a snow truck clears snow from the tarmac of Brussels Airport, after several flights were delayed and cancelled due to the cold temperatures. AFP/Getty Images
8/10 In the Netherlands, at Schiphol Airport, stranded passengers spent the night on camp beds because their flights have been cancelled. AFP/Getty Images
9/10 People walk in front of the ancient Pantheon in downtown Rome, from May 2018 it will begin to charge tourists fees to visit REUTERS
10/10 Tourists take pictures as they visit the ancient Pantheon in downtown Rome REUTERS
“It feels a bit 1950s to be talking about attractive flight crew but let's be honest, who doesn't enjoy being served by a handsome fella with a nice smile and a twinkle in his eye?” Monocle wrote.
“The largely Portuguese crew embody many of the nation's best traits: they're friendly, welcoming and multilingual (they must speak Portuguese, English and a third language),” the magazine went on.
A post shared by TAP Air Portugal (@tapairportugal) on Oct 30, 2017 at 10:56am PDT
“On our travels we've always found them to be polite but never obsequious – and did we mention handsome too?”
Read more:
• How much the best paid workers in 20 professions earn
• Seven outdated men’s style ‘rules’ that you can now ignore
• 16 skills that are hard to learn but will pay off forever
Read the original article on Business Insider. © 2018. Follow Business Insider UK on Twitter.