Photo
The poignant drama “Amour” traces a woman’s decline and the toll it takes on her husband. And the documentary “I Am Evidence” explores the issue of unprocessed rape kits through the lives of four survivors.
What’s Streaming
AMOUR (2012) on iTunes, Amazon, FilmStruck, Google Play, Sundance Now, Vudu and YouTube. At the outset of this Oscar-winning drama by Michael Haneke it’s clear that there has been a loss. Then the story rewinds and we meet Georges (Jean-Louis Trintignant) and Anne (Emmanuelle Riva), a retired couple in Paris. The two lead a peaceful life centered on their unbreakable bond and shared love of music, but it’s suddenly disrupted when Anne has a stroke. What follows is immensely touching, yet painful to watch. In her review for The New York Times, Manohla Dargis named “Amour” a Critic’s Pick and wrote, “This is a film that will make you weep not only because life ends but also because it blooms.”
Photo
NO OFFENCE on Acorn TV. This police procedural from Paul Abbott, the creator of “Shameless,” stands out among British cop dramas for its female lead roles and darkly comical take on the genre. Joanna Scanlan, Elaine Cassidy and Alexandra Roach star as detectives on the hunt for a serial killer in a grimy part of Manchester, England. The first season begins with the detective Dinah Kowalska (Ms. Cassidy) discovering a pattern among two murder victims, and racing to save a potential third.
THE RELATIONTRIP (2018) on Hulu and Vudu. Beck (Renée Felice Smith) and Liam (Matt Bush) meet after a concert and quickly bond over their shared disdain for the pressure to find love and settle down. Liam impulsively suggests they take a “friendship friend trip,” a weekend getaway void of heartfelt conversations and romance. Unsurprisingly, that forced distance fails, and the two fall for each other. That’s when this indie rom-com spoof shifts from charming to absurd. Two uninvited guests, to put it mildly, intrude on the getaway and expose Beck and Liam’s fears and insecurities.
What’s on TV
Photo
I AM EVIDENCE (2018) 8 p.m. on HBO; also on HBO streaming platforms. This documentary explores why thousands of rape kits across the country remained unprocessed for years and highlights those spearheading efforts to get through the backlog. Four survivors whose cases were long ignored share their frustrations with the criminal justice system’s handling of sexual assault crimes and their hope for justice.
IT WAS HIM: THE MANY MURDERS OF ED EDWARDS 9 p.m. on Paramount Network. The former detective John Cameron believes some of the most high-profile murders of the past 60 years, including the “Making a Murderer” case and those committed by the Zodiac Killer, were at the hands of one man, Ed Edwards. This six-part documentary follows Mr. Cameron’s investigation into the possibility that Mr. Edwards, a serial killer, is tied to many more deaths than the five he was found guilty of committing. The detective is joined by the serial killer’s grandson, Wayne Wolfe, who discovered his estranged grandfather’s identity only after Mr. Edwards’s death in 2011.