Photo
A new documentary defines Elvis Presley as a musician first, superstar second. And the clever romantic drama “Right Now, Wrong Then” arrives on Mubi.
What’s on TV
ELVIS PRESLEY: THE SEARCHER (2018) 8 p.m. on HBO; also on HBO streaming platforms. Documenting Elvis Presley’s life in a new light is no small feat. But the director Thom Zimny started working on this two-part portrait with one goal in mind: The King’s music comes first. “The Searcher” is a deeply personal look at Presley’s creative process and musical influences, beginning with his childhood in Mississippi to his final recording sessions in 1976. Interviewees like Tom Petty, Bruce Springsteen and Priscilla Presley recount how the rock legend’s music was often overshadowed by his image, emphasizing that he was most himself while creating and performing. Fans will surely appreciate the featured tracks; Presley’s archivist generously offered 6,000 recordings to choose from.
LITTLEST PET SHOP: A WORLD OF OUR OWN 12 p.m. on Discovery Family. This spinoff series shifts focus from the human protagonist in the original “Littlest Pet Shop” to six pet friends in two back-to-back premiere episodes. A magical portal transports pets to a utopia equipped with ski slopes, animal-friendly apartments and a beauty salon where cats offer back massages. The series opens as the Boston terrier Roxie, house sitting for a pop star, is confronted by a group of snobs who may be using her to throw a house party.
What’s Streaming
Photo
RIGHT NOW, WRONG THEN (2016) on iTunes and Mubi. The South Korean director Hong Sang-soo could have told a simple story if this romantic drama were cut halfway through. A middle-aged director (Jung Jae-young) accidentally arrives to the town of Sowun for his film screening a day early. He meets a young painter (Kim Min-hee) and the two spend a pleasant evening looking at her art, drinking and partying before things turn sour. Then the story starts over. They meet again, and more or less do the same things, but differences both large and small completely transform their night. Mr. Hong “operates his camera as an emotional spectrograph,” A. O. Scott wrote in his New York Times review, but, he adds, “he is equally interested in the operations of cinema itself as a means of ordering, capturing and constructing experience.”
Photo
DEALT (2017) on Hulu, Google Play and YouTube. The magician Richard Turner is dedicated to wowing audiences with sleight of hand. He’s also determined to hide that he is completely blind. “I want to be known for what I do on its own merit,” he says. This documentary examines his refusal to let blindness diminish his talents and abilities. “The director is either too polite or too timid to push Mr. Turner to reveal more details than he’s comfortable sharing,” Monica Castillo wrote in The Times, adding, “As it is, ‘Dealt’ remains a pleasing — if inoffensive — portrait.”