Simon Brodkin - the notorious prankster more commonly known by his stage name Lee Nelson and alter-ego Jason Bent - has struck again, this time handing Theresa May a fake P45 during the Prime Minster's conference speech.
The comedian, who had been sitting on the front row, later tweeted that the P45 was handed out on behalf of Boris Johnson. Following the incident, he was escorted out by security.
May is by no means the first person to have fallen victim to Brodkin's pranks with the comedian's past targets including Donald Trump, Simon Cowell and former FIFA president Sepp Blatter. Below, we run down six of the most memorable.FIFA president Sepp Blatter. Below, we run down six of the most memorable.
Tory conference 2017 – in pictures
23 show all Tory conference 2017 – in pictures
1/23 Comedian Simon Brodkin hands Theresa May a p45 during her conference speech @simonbrodkin/Twitter screengrab
2/23 Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May struggles with her water after she suffered a coughing fit whilst addressing the Conservative Party conference in Manchester Reuters
3/23 Britain's Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson delivers his speech on the third day of the Conservative Party annual conference
4/23 Bear Grylls at the Conservative party conference at the Manchester Central Convention Complex PA
5/23 Britain's International Development Secretary Priti Patel gestures after delivering her speech on the third day of the Conservative Party conference Paul Ellis/AFP
6/23 Prime Minister Theresa May and Chancellor Philip Hammond visit a home in Manchester during the Conservative Party conference in the city Phil Noble/PA
7/23 Britain's Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson returns from a morning run on the second day of the Conservative Party Conference, in Manchester Reuters/Phil Noble
8/23 Delegates view a display board showing the history of the Conservative Party as they arrive for the first day of the annual Conservative Party conference Carl Court/Getty
9/23 Delegates carry pro-Brexit bags as they arrive for the first day of the annual Conservative Party conference Getty
10/23 Delegates listen to Justine Greening's speech on the first day of conference Carl Court/Getty
11/23 Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May and her husband Philip applaud a speaker on the first day of the annual Conservative Party conference Carl Court/Getty
12/23 Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson speaks at the Conservative Party Conference at the Manchester Central Convention Complex PA
13/23 Secretary of State for Education, Justine Greening, speaks on the first day of the conference Carl Court/Getty
14/23 Chairman of the Conservative Party, Patrick McLoughlin, speaks at the opening of the first day of the Tory party conference
15/23 Chancellor of the Exchequer, Philip Hammond, arrives for the first day of Tory party conference Carl Court/Getty
16/23 Secretary of State for Defence, Michael Fallon, arrives at conference Getty
17/23 Home Secretary, Amber Rudd (C), attends the first day of the Conservative Party conference Carl Court/Getty
18/23 Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, Sajid Javid, attends the first day of the Conservative Party conference Getty
19/23 Former Conservative minister, Edwina Currie, at the first day of conference Carl Court/Getty
20/23 Secretary of State for International Trade, Liam Fox, arrives at conference Carl Court/Getty
21/23 Britain's Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson, arrives at the conference hotel for the Conservative Party Conference Reuters/Darren Staples
22/23 The anti-Tory march makes its way to the Conservative party conference in Manchester Peter Byrne/PA
23/23 A demonstrator walks a dog wearing a European Union flag during a protest on the opening day of the Conservative Party Conference, in Manchester Reuters/Darren Staples
November 2014
The X Factor
Stereo Kicks were supposedly going to be the next One Direction, but unfortunately were soon forgotten after The X Factor finished. Still, their performance of “You Are Not Alone” has been remembered over the years, primarily because Lee stormed the stage, leaving the young members of the group baffled and the judges on their feet, shouting at the comedian to get off. The show’s floor manager was soon there to take him away.
June 2015
Kanye West's Glastonbury headline set
Midway through Kanye West’s headline performance at Glastonbury Festival, the stage was invaded by none other than Lee Nelson. Wearing a ‘LEE-ZUS’ shirt — a play on Kanye’s YEEZUS album title — Lee walked to the front of the stage during the song “Black Skinhead”. The prankster was soon tackled to the ground and Kanye restarted the song.
July 2015
Sepp Blatter's FIFA press conference
​Brodkin gatecrashed a FIFA conference in Switzerland following the corruption scandal which rocked the FIFA conference in Switzerland following the corruption scandal which rocked the organisation in July 2015. He walked on stage, parading as Jason Bent, and threw a wad of dollar bills over then-FIFA president Sepp Blatter insisting it was part of a bid from North Korea to host the 2026 World Cup. Brodkin was later arrested and charged with trespassing.
January 2016
Britain's Got Talent
Brodkin's most elaborate prank came when he attended the Britain's Got Talent open auditions in London. Disguising himself as rapping Jewish rabbi Steven Goldblatt, producers put him through to the main auditions in front of judges, including Simon Cowell and Amanda Holden, despite being intentionally terrible. After ten hours of waiting, he was put through by Cowell and co after providing a false backstory about his 'dead' mother. It wasn't until after the event that the producers realised he was Lee Nelson.
March 2016
Volkswagen launch
Volkswagen was putting on a huge show, launching a new model. Lee decided to dress up as a mechanic and storm the stage in Switzerland to protest the company’s emissions scandal. “Excuse me, I have the new cheat box. No ones going to find out about this one, I’m just going to fit it now.” The incident was followed by Channel 4.
June 2016
Donald Trump's golf resort re-opening
Theresa May isn't the only world leader to have fallen victim to Nelson's pranks - Donald Trump encountered the comedian back in June 2016 at the re-opening of his golf resort in Scotland, handing out golf balls emblazoned with swastikas to the crowd as the then-presidential candidate took the podium for a speech.
Follow Independent Culture on Facebook