Windsor residents are renting out their homes over the royal wedding weekend for extremely high prices.
One two-bedroom property that sleeps four is listed on Airbnb as being “located perfectly for the royal wedding” – and it costs £3,195 for the night.
The host is just one of many homeowners capitalising on public interest in the upcoming nuptials of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle by renting out their properties at increased prices.
On Airbnb, various homes are listed as “luxury royal wedding accommodation” and are going for more than £2,000 a night.
Other people are merely renting out spare rooms in their Windsor houses – although these are still going for increased rates.
Needless to say, accommodation close to Windsor Castle will be highly sought after among royal fans wishing to catch a glimpse of the proceedings in 19 May.
It’s not just royal fans looking for a place to stay in the Berkshire town though – earlier this year it was reported that American media organisations were paying six-figure sums for the best vantage points overlooking the royal couple’s procession through the town.
And while many Windsor residents are renting out their homes to make money, not everyone is comfortable doing so.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle – in pictures
+ show all Prince Harry and Meghan Markle – in pictures
1/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle announce their engagement. Getty Images
2/20 Meghan Markle and Prince Harry at the Crown Liquor Saloon, Belfast during their visit to Northern Ireland. Rex Features
3/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle pose for their engagement shoot. Alexi Lubomirski
4/20 Meghan Markle and Prince Harry attend Christmas Day Church service at Church of St Mary Magdalene on December 25, 2017 in King's Lynn. Chris Jackson/Getty Images
5/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle attend a wheelchair tennis event at the Invictus Games in Toronto. AP
6/20 Another picture from Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's engagement shoot. Alexi Lubomirski
7/20 Prince Harry and his fiancée Meghan Markle watch a dance performance by Jukebox Collective during a visit at Cardiff Castle for a day showcasing the rich culture and heritage of Wales. AFP/Getty Images
8/20 Meghan Markle shows off her engagement ring with Prince Harry. Getty Images
9/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle pose during a visit to Reprezent 107.3FM in Pop Brixton in London. The Reprezent training programme was established in Peckham in 2008, in response to the alarming rise in knife crime, to help young people develop and socialise through radio. Getty Images
10/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle listen to a broadcast through headphones at Reprezent 107.3FM in Pop Brixton. Getty
11/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle meet members of the public following a visit to youth-orientated radio station, Reprezent FM, in Brixton, south London PA
12/20 Prince Harry kisses Meghan Markle at the Invictus Games in Toronto. AP
13/20 AFP/Getty Images
14/20 Picture: Prince Harry and Meghan Markle look at some prosthetic limbs made by the Titanic FX company during a visit to Catalyst Inc science park in Belfast where they met some of Northern Ireland's brightest young entrepreneurs. Niall Carson/PA Wire/PA Images
15/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle pose at The Sunken Gardens. Getty Images
16/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle speak to an athlete after a Wheelchair Tennis match at the 2017 Invictus Games PA Wire/PA Images
17/20 Getty Images
18/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle watch a wheelchair tennis event at the Invictus Games AP
19/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle joke around Getty Images for the Invictus Ga
20/20 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle PA Wire/PA Images
“We did think about it – £15,000 would pay to repair the bathroom and all the other things that are falling down,” Vanessa Greenwood, whose family home overlooks two stretches of the planned route, told the BBC.
“Although we could have charged £3,000 a night minimum for where we are in Windsor, I personally had a horrible feeling... I wasn’t comfortable having someone I wouldn’t know with the ability to look down on the royal wedding route.
“You just don’t know and you can’t be 100 per cent sure that the people in your home are good people, reliable and honest, and you worry it could be something sinister.”
However, the homeowners escaping the royal fanfare and leaving their homes in the hope of making some fast cash won’t suddenly be quite as rich as they might hope – you have to pay tax on any money made through short-term letting.
There’s also HMRC’s Connect system, which monitors any income from websites including Airbnb.
Still, it is hoped the worldwide interest in Windsor due to the wedding will provide a boost to the town’s economy in the long run.