If you want to engage in a divisive and very vivid discussion, simply ask someone for their opinion on the topic of period sex.
Some can’t imagine anything worse, while others remain completely unperturbed by the idea.
For those whose main argument against the notion is the prospect of mess, a company has now created a reusable menstrual cup that can be worn during penetrative sex.
The Ziggy Cup is a new product that’s been manufactured by women’s intimate health brand Intimina.
It’s the world’s first reusable menstrual cup that can be worn during intercourse, as it’s been created with a flat-fit design that sits right below the cervix when inserted.
“Half the world will, once, or currently menstruate - at Intimina, we believe it’s high time women were offered more choice, more control, and more freedom during her period,” said Amandine Pranlas-Descours, global brand director of Intimina.
While it could be described as revolutionary in its own right, the Ziggy Cup isn’t the only menstrual product that can be worn during sex.
The Ziggy Cup is the first menstrual cup that can be worn during sex ( Intimina )
A company in California called Flex has produced a menstrual disc that sits just past the vaginal canal, allowing for people on their periods to enjoy sex at their leisure.
However, the menstrual disc is disposable, as opposed to the reusable Ziggy Cup.
The latest offering from Intimina can supposedly last for up to two years, making it a fairly worthy investment in terms of cost and environmental impact.
However, some would argue that the product isn’t sustainable enough considering the fact that a Mooncup can reportedly last for several years.
Many people have responded positively to the product on social media, praising the product for its unique design.
“Oh my god this is what I’ve been waiting for!!!” one person wrote on Instagram. “I’ve never understood why menstrual discs have to be disposable.
“And now I know they don’t! I’m so freaking excited about this!"
The Independent's Millennial Love group is the best place to discuss to the highs and lows of modern dating and relationships. Join the conversation here.​