Zlatan Ibrahimovic has announced his arrival at LA Galaxy in typically understated fashion.
The 36-year-old Swede, who left Manchester United on Thursday, has long been linked with a move to the MLS franchise and although no confirmation has yet come from the team, the front page of Friday's LA Times sports section shows him in a Galaxy jersey, above the headline 'He's Hard To Ignore'.
The newspaper also featured a full-page advertisement about Ibrahimovic which simply read: "Dear Los Angeles. You're welcome."
Who could leave Manchester United this summer?
9 show all Who could leave Manchester United this summer?
1/9 Who could leave Manchester United this summer? Jose Mourinho is Getty
2/9 Luke Shaw Survival rating: 2/10 Getty
3/9 Daley Blind Survival rating: 3/10 Getty
4/9 Matteo Darmian Survival rating: 2/10 Getty
5/9 Ander Herrera Survival rating: 5/10 Getty
6/9 Anthony Martial Survival rating: 6/10 Getty
7/9 Chris Smalling Survival rating: 6/10 Getty
8/9 Marouane Fellaini Survival rating: 1/10 Getty
9/9 Michael Carrick Survival rating: 0/10 Getty
Ibrahimovic's signature and the Galaxy logo were at the bottom of the ad.
LA Galaxy eventually announced the signing on Friday, with Ibrahimovic insisting that he has joined the side to win, not to simply pick up a pay cheque.
"After being in Europe, winning 33 trophies, playing in the best teams in the world, playing with the best players in the world, I wanted to come to the US and play my game there," Ibrahimovic said in an interview in the LA Times.
"I wanted people to enjoy my game there and to win. And I chose the Galaxy to do that.
"I am ready to go now. First of all, I'm there to play football. I'm not there for something else. My first objective is to play football and do what I'm good at.
"I'm excited to come over and to get the experience with the Galaxy and to explore how the football is there. I want to be part of it and make it better."
Ibrahimovic has joined MLS side LA Galaxy (Getty)
LA Times journalist Dylan Hernandez wrote: "If this doesn't work, if Zlatan Ibrahimovic fails to take the Galaxy out of the shadows of this city's sporting landscape, the soccer franchise might as well not sign another big-name foreign player.
"Because if Ibrahimovic can't make Los Angeles care about the Galaxy, there isn't a player who can."
Dan Beckerman, the president of entertainment giant AEG, the Galaxy's parent organisation, said Ibrahimovic would become one of the biggest stars in the Hollywood city.
"He's giving up a lot to come here," Beckerman told the LA Times. He's made it clear he's coming here to win championships. It's not about the money.
"L.A. is a place for stars, and he's going to be one of the brightest stars that's ever played in this market. In any sport."
A statement published to United’s official club website on Thursday read: ”Manchester United confirms that it has agreed to the termination of Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s contract with immediate effect.
“Everyone at the club would like to thank Zlatan for his contribution to the team since his arrival and wishes him well for the future.”
Ibrahimovic leaves United having made just seven appearances this season after struggling to recover from the effects of a serious knee ligament injury suffered last April.
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.