There have been several reports this week of people struggling after overspending at Christmas. On Wednesday the Money Advice Service said that almost one in three of us felt pressured to spend more than we could afford during the festive period, while one in ten have fallen into debt, or further into existing debt, as a result of spending too much.
That followed official figures on Monday showing that consumers borrowed more money in the run-up to Christmas than in any month since February 2008 – which was the height of the credit crunch.
When it comes to getting into debt, many sensible people are tempted to repeat the words of the Dickens character Mr Micawber, whose recipe for happiness was simply that it could be achieved by spending within your means (I'm paraphrasing, of course).
Typical of that view is reader Amanda Willis. She wrote: "Why don't you advise people to spend less? You never seem to do this, yet it is the best advice you could give!" It is sound advice to spend sensibly, but it is not always possible to spend less, particularly if you're forced to survive on very little. There are lots of people living on a financial knife-edge for all sorts of reasons – and if they do get into debt, it can be disastrous as their meagre budget can't cope with the extra expense.
We all know people who are profligate and splash their cash unwisely. But many who will be suffering financially this month deserve our sympathy. I'm thinking of those who busted their normal budget in an attempt to have a decent Christmas. Who can blame them for that?
Ms Willis is less sympathetic. "One can't always 'blame the government', or whatever, as people are wont to do," she wrote. "That is like saying, 'I am fat because there is a lot of food on sale'! People must take responsibility for themselves, and stop spending." She suggested that rather than giving up alcohol in January, they should give up spending. I certainly know a few people who could benefit if they put the brakes on their needless spending for a few weeks – and wouldn't just be their bank balance that they helped. But I also know people who are struggling to get by, and it is those we should be considering now. If you know of anyone in this position, tell them about the free debt advice they can get from the likes of Citizens Advice, StepChange or National Debtline.