Season 3, Episode 4: ‘Hell of a Ride’
Chuck Rhoades Jr. and Charles Rhoades Sr. are at war. They have been since the last season of “Billions,” when son betrayed father as part of a plot by Chuck to ruin his nemesis, Bobby Axelrod. But the most powerful weapon wielded in the conflict so far hasn’t been a legal threat or a stock swindle. It’s the kiss that Charles plants square on Chuck’s mouth, hands locked on his son’s head to prevent him from pulling away.
That kiss is the climax of “Hell of a Ride,” this week’s aptly titled episode from the writer Randall Green and the director John Dahl. In a series that has made a study of the physicality of the rich and powerful, the scene is a graduate-level course.
On one level, and like so many of these characters’ other words and actions, it is very likely a reference to a work of macho pop culture: the kiss of betrayal that Michael Corleone plants on his disloyal brother Fredo in “The Godfather Part II.” (Bobby quoted the first “Godfather” film earlier in the episode when he instructed his philanthropy guru, Sean Ayles (Jack Gilpin), to “use all your powers and all your skills” in support of his latest stealthy venture.) But like the best such moments on “Billions,” the context transforms the reference into something new and unique, and in this case uniquely disturbing.
The father-son dynamic creates a power imbalance absent in the brother-to-brother version, adding an overtone of Oedipal anxiety and parental abuse. That ugliness is compounded in turn by the creepy sexualization of the two men’s relationship in this episode, from Charles’s bawdy stories of his collegiate sexual exploits to the revelation that Chuck lost his virginity at age fourteen to a prostitute hand-selected by his father based on firsthand knowledge of her skills. Charles’s presence also looms large over Chuck and Wendy’s heart-to-heart regarding her one-night stand with the space entrepreneur Craig Heidecker during their separation — an act of infidelity Charles had taken it upon himself to uncover and parade before his son.