Since I was a teenager, I have always said I will own a property by myself, and I have never lost sight of this vision. I should start by saying that I’m fully aware of how extreme I am, and would never expect anyone else to behave in such a ludicrous way. I also consider myself very lucky to still live with my parents, which at 24 is becoming increasingly common given the housing crisis. My point of this article therefore, is to highlight to the older generation that even someone like myself, who is in a fairly privileged position yet still goes to extreme lengths to save money, is still in a futile position when it comes to climbing on to the property ladder.
I have saved £20,000 in two years and I have still enjoyed life to its fullest. In those two years I’ve travelled to Stockholm, Copenhagen, Prague, Portugal, Croatia, Barcelona, Singapore, Bali, Switzerland, Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Luxembourg and Paris. I am on a pretty average London salary (around £30,000), and my weekends are normally spent going out for brunch/lunch/dinner. I will never turn down a social event because of money, I will buy clothes around once a month, and I drive a Nissan Micra.
Things I never spend money on are: alcohol/cigarettes/drugs (I’m teetotal); lunches at work; hot/cold drinks; Ubers/taxis.
I have always been into organisation, especially with money. I used to look forward to coming home from university, as I could neatly file away my bank statements and take utter delight in highlighting all the different bits of information. In my first year of university, I wrote down everything I spent in my diary, all colour-coded. I moved on to my beloved spreadsheets. Each column had a colour. I even had a miscellaneous column, where I would record things such as “20p – toilet at Euston” or “£1 – homeless person”. This was when my OCD really kicked inand I would relish the last day of every month, when my formulas would reveal how much I had spent in total, and I could see if this matched my bank statement. I know what people are thinking – why would you not just look at the bank statement – but it doesn’t record cash. When I went abroad, I would record every penny spent on an app, and would count my cash at the end of every day to check I was all in sync. There was nothing more satisfying than working out where that missing €3 went.
Despite always putting £500-£1,000 into my savings, I realised I was recording rather than budgeting. I then planned ahead instead. I realised if I had any hope of saving for a deposit, I would need to commit to a target amount. I decided on £50,000 by the time I turn 27. I worked out every payday date until 5 June 2020 and worked backwards. I was not willing to sacrifice my travelling, so I decided to save £1,200 every four weeks when I got paid – £1,000 for the deposit and £200 into my holiday budget.
I take home £1,739 every four weeks. After I put the £1,200 away, I am left with £539 for four weeks. Around £150 goes on travel to and from work (I will wait at the barriers until 6.59pm, when off-peak hits), £35 on petrol and £45 on phone bills/gym etc. This leaves me with £75 to spend on anything I choose. I go through my diary, adding in any dinners, nail appointments and birthdays that I know are coming up, and estimate how much I will spend. Some weeks I’ll go over the weekly budget, so I know I have to cut back in other weeks, but I rarely dip into my savings. If I have to borrow the odd £10, I’ll just make up the difference on the next payday (I’ll set myself a reminder to pay in an extra £10 into my savings on payday).
Again, I am aware this all sounds eccentric and I am sure I am the only person in the world who is this obsessed, but I am bang on track to hit my £50,000 savings on 5 June 2020.
Yes, this is great. Pat on the back to me. But my point is that all of this effort does not match the outcome. Housing associations offer us “shared ownership”, but this actually requires your salary to be a mere 40% of your total outgoings, meaning that in order to own 25% of a tiny one-bed flat, your annual household income must be on average around £70,000. Thus, whether I save £50,000 or £100,000, I’m still going to find it incredibly difficult to buy my first property, and unless my salary doubles in the next few years, I’m going to end up having to save a lot lot more. Again, I live with my parents and I am in a decent job, so imagine how hard it is for the majority of my generation who have already flown the nest!